Sherlock Holmes took his bottle from the corner of the mantelpieceand his hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case. With his long,white, nervous fingers he adjusted the delicate needle, and rolledback his left shirt-cuff. For some little time his eyes restedthoughtfully upon the sinewy forearm and wrist all dotted and scarredwith innumerable puncture-marks. Finally he thrust the sharp pointhome, pressed down the tiny piston, and sank back into thevelvet-lined arm-chair with a long sigh of satisfaction.Three times a day for many months I had witnessed this performance,but custom had not reconciled my mind to it. On the contrary, fromday to day I had become more irritable at the sight, and myconscience swelled nightly within me at the thought that I had lackedthe courage to protest. Again and again I had registered a vow that Ishould deliver my soul upon the subject, but there was that in thecool, nonchalant air of my companion which made him the last man withwhom one would care to take anything approaching to a liberty. Hisgreat powers, his masterly manner, and the experience which I had hadof his many extraordinary qualities, all made me diffident andbackward in crossing him.Yet upon that afternoon, whether it was the Beaune which I had takenwith my lunch, or the additional exasperation produced by the extremedeliberation of his manner, I suddenly felt that I could hold out nolonger."Which is it to-day?" I asked,--"morphine or cocaine?"He raised his eyes languidly from the old black-letter volume whichhe had opened. "It is cocaine," he said,--"a seven-per-cent solution.Would you care to try it?""No, indeed," I answered, brusquely. "My constitution has not gotover the Afghan campaign yet. I cannot afford to throw any extrastrain upon it."He smiled at my vehemence. "Perhaps you are right, Watson," he said."I suppose that its influence is physically a bad one. I find it,however, so transcendently stimulating and clarifying to the mindthat its secondary action is a matter of small moment.""But consider!" I said, earnestly. "Count the cost! Your brain may,as you say, be roused and excited, but it is a pathological andmorbid process, which involves increased tissue-change and may atlast leave a permanent weakness. You know, too, what a black reactioncomes upon you. Surely the game is hardly worth the candle. Whyshould you, for a mere passing pleasure, risk the loss of those greatpowers with which you have been endowed?Remember that I speak notonly as one comrade to another, but as a medical man to one for whoseconstitution he is to some extent answerable."He did not seem offended. On the contrary, he put his fingertipstogether and leaned his elbows on the arms of his chair, like one whohas a relish for conversation."My mind," he said, "rebels at stagnation. Give me problems, give mework, give me the most abstruse cryptogram or the most intricateanalysis, and I am in my own proper atmosphere. I can dispense thenwith artificial stimulants. But I abhor the dull routine ofexistence. I crave for mental exaltation. That is why I have chosenmy own particular profession,--or rather created it, for I am theonly one in the world.""The only unofficial detective?" I said, raising my eyebrows."The only unofficial consulting detective," he answered."I am thelast and highest court of appeal in detection. When Gregson orLestrade or Athelney Jones are out of their depths--which, by theway, is their normal state--the matter is laid before me. I examinethe data, as an expert, and pronounce a specialist's opinion. I claimno credit in such cases. My name figures in no newspaper. The workitself, the pleasure of finding a field for my peculiar powers, is myhighest reward. But you have yourself had some experience of mymethods of work in the Jefferson Hope case.""Yes, indeed," said I, cordially. "I was never so struck by anythingin my life. I even embodied it in a small brochure with the somewhatfantastic title of 'A Study in Scarlet.'"He shook his head sadly. "I glanced over it," said he."Honestly, Icannot congratulate you upon it. Detection is, or ought to be, anexact science, and should be treated in the same cold and unemotionalmanner. You have attempted to tinge it with romanticism, whichproduces much the same effect as if you worked a love-story or anelopement into the fifth proposition of Euclid.""But the romance was there," I remonstrated. "I could not tamper withthe facts.""Some facts should be suppressed, or at least a just sense ofproportion should be observed in treating them. The only point in thecase which deserved mention was the curious analytical reasoning fromeffects to causes by which I succeeded in unraveling it."I was annoyed at this criticism of a work which had been speciallydesigned to please him. I confess, too, that I was irritated by theegotism which seemed to demand that every line of my pamphlet shouldbe devoted to his own special doings. More than once during the yearsthat I had lived with him in Baker Street I had observed that a smallvanity underlay my companion's quiet and didactic manner. I made noremark, however, but sat nursing my wounded leg. I had a Jezailbullet through it some time before, and, though it did not prevent mefrom walking, it ached wearily at every change of the weather."My practice has extended recently to the Continent," said Holmes,after a while, filling up his old brier-root pipe. "I was consultedlast week by Francois Le Villard, who, as you probably know, has comerather to the front lately in the French detective service. He hasall the Celtic power of quick intuition, but he is deficient in thewide range of exact knowledge which is essential to the higherdevelopments of his art. The case was concerned with a will, andpossessed some features of interest. I was able to refer him to twoparallel cases, the one at Riga in 1857, and the other at St. Louisin 1871, which have suggested to him the true solution. Here is theletter which I had this morning acknowledging my assistance." Hetossed over, as he spoke, a crumpled sheet of foreign notepaper. Iglanced my eyes down it, catching a profusion of notes of admiration,with stray magnifiques, coup-de-maîtres and tours-de-force, alltestifying to the ardent admiration of the Frenchman."He speaks as a pupil to his master," said I."Oh, he rates my assistance too highly," said Sherlock Holmes,lightly. "He has considerable gifts himself. He possesses two out ofthe three qualities necessary for the ideal detective. He has thepower of observation and that of deduction. He is only wanting inknowledge; and that may come in time. He is now translating my smallworks into French.""Your works?""Oh, didn't you know?" he cried, laughing. "Yes, I have been guiltyof several monographs. They are all upon technical subjects. Here,for example, is one 'Upon the Distinction between the Ashes of theVarious Tobaccoes.' In it I enumerate a hundred and forty forms ofcigar-, cigarette-, and pipe-tobacco, with colored platesillustrating the difference in the ash. It is a point which iscontinually turning up in criminal trials, and which is sometimes ofsupreme importance as a clue. If you can say definitely, for example,that some murder has been done by a man who was smoking an Indianlunkah, it obviously narrows your field of search. To the trained eyethere is as much difference between the black ash of a Trichinopolyand the white fluff of bird's-eye as there is between a cabbage and apotato.""You have an extraordinary genius for minutiae," I remarked."I appreciate their importance. Here is my monograph upon the tracingof footsteps, with some remarks upon the uses of plaster of Paris asa preserver of impresses. Here, too, is a curious little work uponthe influence of a trade upon the form of the hand, with lithotypesof the hands of slaters, sailors, corkcutters, compositors, weavers,and diamond-polishers. That is a matter of great practical interestto the scientific detective,--especially in cases of unclaimedbodies, or in discovering the antecedents of criminals. But I wearyyou with my hobby.""Not at all," I answered, earnestly. "It is of the greatest interestto me, especially since I have had the opportunity of observing yourpractical application of it. But you spoke just now of observationand deduction. Surely the one to some extent implies the other.""Why, hardly," he answered, leaning back luxuriously in his armchair,and sending up thick blue wreaths from his pipe. "For example,observation shows me that you have been to the Wigmore StreetPost-Office this morning, but deduction lets me know that when thereyou dispatched a telegram.""Right!" said I. "Right on both points! But I confess that I don'tsee how you arrived at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my part, andI have mentioned it to no one.""It is simplicity itself," he remarked, chuckling at mysurprise,--"so absurdly simple that an explanation is superfluous;and yet it may serve to define the limits of observation and ofdeduction. Observation tells me that you have a little reddish mouldadhering to your instep. Just opposite the Seymour Street Office theyhave taken up the pavement and thrown up some earth which lies insuch a way that it is difficult to avoid treading in it in entering.The earth is of this peculiar reddish tint which is found, as far asI know, nowhere else in the neighborhood. So much is observation. Therest is deduction.""How, then, did you deduce the telegram?""Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I satopposite to you all morning. I see also in your open desk there thatyou have a sheet of stamps and a thick bundle of postcards.Whatcould you go into the post-office for, then, but to send a wire?Eliminate all other factors, and the one which remains must be thetruth.""In this case it certainly is so," I replied, after a little thought."The thing, however, is, as you say, of the simplest.Would youthink me impertinent if I were to put your theories to a more severetest?""On the contrary," he answered, "it would prevent me from taking asecond dose of cocaine. I should be delighted to look into anyproblem which you might submit to me.""I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have anyobject in daily use without leaving the impress of his individualityupon it in such a way that a trained observer might read it. Now, Ihave here a watch which has recently come into my possession. Wouldyou have the kindness to let me have an opinion upon the character orhabits of the late owner?"I handed him over the watch with some slight feeling of amusement inmy heart, for the test was, as I thought, an impossible one, and Iintended it as a lesson against the somewhat dogmatic tone which heoccasionally assumed. He balanced the watch in his hand, gazed hardat the dial, opened the back, and examined the works, first with hisnaked eyes and then with a powerful convex lens. I could hardly keepfrom smiling at his crestfallen face when he finally snapped the caseto and handed it back."There are hardly any data," he remarked. "The watch has beenrecently cleaned, which robs me of my most suggestive facts.""You are right," I answered. "It was cleaned before being sent tome." In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward a mostlame and impotent excuse to cover his failure. What data could heexpect from an uncleaned watch?"Though unsatisfactory, my research has not been entirely barren," heobserved, staring up at the ceiling with dreamy, lack-lustre eyes."Subject to your correction, I should judge that the watch belongedto your elder brother, who inherited it from your father.""That you gather, no doubt, from the H. W. upon the back?""Quite so. The W. suggests your own name. The date of the watch isnearly fifty years back, and the initials are as old as the watch: soit was made for the last generation. Jewelry usually descents to theeldest son, and he is most likely to have the same name as thefather. Your father has, if I remember right, been dead many years.It has, therefore, been in the hands of your eldest brother.""Right, so far," said I. "Anything else?""He was a man of untidy habits,--very untidy and careless. He wasleft with good prospects, but he threw away his chances, lived forsome time in poverty with occasional short intervals of prosperity,and finally, taking to drink, he died. That is all I can gather."I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room withconsiderable bitterness in my heart."This is unworthy of you, Holmes," I said. "I could not have believedthat you would have descended to this. You have made inquires intothe history of my unhappy brother, and you now pretend to deduce thisknowledge in some fanciful way. You cannot expect me to believe thatyou have read all this from his old watch! It is unkind, and, tospeak plainly, has a touch of charlatanism in it.""My dear doctor," said he, kindly, "pray accept my apologies. Viewing the matter as an abstract problem, I had forgotten howpersonal and painful a thing it might be to you. I assure you,however, that I never even knew that you had a brother until youhanded me the watch.""Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get thesefacts? They are absolutely correct in every particular.""Ah, that is good luck. I could only say what was the balance ofprobability. I did not at all expect to be so accurate.""But it was not mere guess-work?""No, no: I never guess. It is a shocking habit,--destructive to thelogical faculty. What seems strange to you is only so because you donot follow my train of thought or observe the small facts upon whichlarge inferences may depend. For example, I began by stating thatyour brother was careless. When you observe the lower part of thatwatch-case you notice that it is not only dinted in two places, butit is cut and marked all over from the habit of keeping other hardobjects, such as coins or keys, in the same pocket. Surely it is nogreat feat to assume that a man who treats a fifty-guinea watch socavalierly must be a careless man. Neither is it a very far-fetchedinference that a man who inherits one article of such value is prettywell provided for in other respects."I nodded, to show that I followed his reasoning."It is very customary for pawnbrokers in England, when they take awatch, to scratch the number of the ticket with a pin-point upon theinside of the case. It is more handy than a label, as there is norisk of the number being lost or transposed. There are no less thanfour such numbers visible to my lens on the inside of this case.Inference,--that your brother was often at low water. Secondaryinference,--that he had occasional bursts of prosperity, or he couldnot have redeemed the pledge. Finally, I ask you to look at the innerplate, which contains the key-hole. Look at the thousands ofscratches all round the hole,--marks where the key has slipped. Whatsober man's key could have scored those grooves? But you will neversee a drunkard's watch without them. He winds it at night, and heleaves these traces of his unsteady hand. Where is the mystery in allthis?""It is as clear as daylight," I answered. "I regret the injusticewhich I did you. I should have had more faith in your marvellousfaculty. May I ask whether you have any professional inquiry on footat present?""None. Hence the cocaine. I cannot live without brain-work. What elseis there to live for? Stand at the window here. Was ever such adreary, dismal, unprofitable world? See how the yellow fog swirlsdown the street and drifts across the duncolored houses. What couldbe more hopelessly prosaic and material? What is the use of havingpowers, doctor, when one has no field upon which to exert them? Crimeis commonplace, existence is commonplace, and no qualities save thosewhich are commonplace have any function upon earth."I had opened my mouth to reply to this tirade, when with a crispknock our landlady entered, bearing a card upon the brass salver."A young lady for you, sir," she said, addressing my companion."Miss Mary Morstan," he read. "Hum! I have no recollection of thename. Ask the young lady to step up, Mrs. Hudson. Don't go, doctor. Ishould prefer that you remain." CHAPTER II The Statement of the CaseMiss Morstan entered the room with a firm step and an outwardcomposure of manner. She was a blonde young lady, small, dainty, wellgloved, and dressed in the most perfect taste. There was, however, aplainness and simplicity about her costume which bore with it asuggestion of limited means. The dress was a sombre grayish beige,untrimmed and unbraided, and she wore a small turban of the same dullhue, relieved only by a suspicion of white feather in the side. Herface had neither regularity of feature nor beauty of complexion, buther expression was sweet and amiable, and her large blue eyes weresingularly spiritual and sympathetic. In an experience of women whichextends over many nations and three separate continents, I have neverlooked upon a face which gave a clearer promise of a refined andsensitive nature. I could not but observe that as she took the seatwhich Sherlock Holmes placed for her, her lip trembled, her handquivered, and she showed every sign of intense inward agitation."I have come to you, Mr. Holmes," she said, "because you once enabledmy employer, Mrs. Cecil Forrester, to unravel a little domesticcomplication. She was much impressed by your kindness and skill.""Mrs. Cecil Forrester," he repeated thoughtfully. "I believe that Iwas of some slight service to her. The case, however, as I rememberit, was a very simple one.""She did not think so. But at least you cannot say the same of mine.I can hardly imagine anything more strange, more utterlyinexplicable, than the situation in which I find myself."Holmes rubbed his hands, and his eyes glistened. He leaned forward inhis chair with an expression of extraordinary concentration upon hisclear-cut, hawklike features. "State your case," said he, in brisk,business tones.I felt that my position was an embarrassing one. "You will, I amsure, excuse me," I said, rising from my chair.To my surprise, the young lady held up her gloved hand to detain me."If your friend," she said, "would be good enough to stop, he mightbe of inestimable service to me."I relapsed into my chair."Briefly," she continued, "the facts are these. My father was anofficer in an Indian regiment who sent me home when I was quite achild. My mother was dead, and I had no relative in England. I wasplaced, however, in a comfortable boarding establishment atEdinburgh, and there I remained until I was seventeen years of age.In the year 1878 my father, who was senior captain of his regiment,obtained twelve months' leave and came home. He telegraphed to mefrom London that he had arrived all safe, and directed me to comedown at once, giving the Langham Hotel as his address. His message,as I remember, was full of kindness and love. On reaching London Idrove to the Langham, and was informed that Captain Morstan wasstaying there, but that he had gone out the night before and had notyet returned. I waited all day without news of him. That night, onthe advice of the manager of the hotel, I communicated with thepolice, and next morning we advertised in all the papers. Ourinquiries let to no result; and from that day to this no word hasever been heard of my unfortunate father. He came home with his heartfull of hope, to find some peace, some comfort, and instead--" Sheput her hand to her throat, and a choking sob cut short the sentence."The date?" asked Holmes, opening his note-book."He disappeared upon the 3d of December, 1878,--nearly ten yearsago.""His luggage?""Remained at the hotel. There was nothing in it to suggest aclue,--some clothes, some books, and a considerable number ofcuriosities from the Andaman Islands. He had been one of the officersin charge of the convict-guard there.""Had he any friends in town?""Only one that we know of,--Major Sholto, of his own regiment, the34th Bombay Infantry. The major had retired some little time before,and lived at Upper Norwood. We communicated with him, of course, buthe did not even know that his brother officer was in England.""A singular case," remarked Holmes."I have not yet described to you the most singular part. About sixyears ago--to be exact, upon the 4th of May, 1882--an advertisementappeared in the Times asking for the address of Miss Mary Morstan andstating that it would be to her advantage to come forward. There wasno name or address appended. I had at that time just entered thefamily of Mrs. Cecil Forrester in the capacity of governess. By heradvice I published my address in the advertisement column. The sameday there arrived through the post a small card-board box addressedto me, which I found to contain a very large and lustrous pearl. Noword of writing was enclosed. Since then every year upon the samedate there has always appeared a similar box, containing a similarpearl, without any clue as to the sender. They have been pronouncedby an expert to be of a rare variety and of considerable value. Youcan see for yourselves that they are very handsome." She opened aflat box as she spoke, and showed me six of the finest pearls that Ihad ever seen."Your statement is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes."Hasanything else occurred to you?""Yes, and no later than to-day. That is why I have come to you.Thismorning I received this letter, which you will perhaps read foryourself.""Thank you," said Holmes. "The envelope too, please. Postmark,London, S.W. Date, July 7. Hum! Man's thumb-mark on corner,--probablypostman. Best quality paper. Envelopes at sixpence a packet.Particular man in his stationery. No address. 'Be at the third pillarfrom the left outside the Lyceum Theatre to-night at seven o'clock.If you are distrustful, bring two friends. You are a wronged woman,and shall have justice. Do not bring police. If you do, all will bein vain. Your unknown friend.' Well, really, this is a very prettylittle mystery.What do you intend to do, Miss Morstan?""That is exactly what I want to ask you.""Then we shall most certainly go. You and I and--yes, why, Dr. Watson is the very man. Your correspondent says two friends. He and Ihave worked together before.""But would he come?" she asked, with something appealing in her voiceand expression."I should be proud and happy," said I, fervently, "if I can be of anyservice.""You are both very kind," she answered. "I have led a retired life,and have no friends whom I could appeal to. If I am here at six itwill do, I suppose?""You must not be later," said Holmes. "There is one other point,however. Is this handwriting the same as that upon the pearl-boxaddresses?""I have them here," she answered, producing half a dozen pieces ofpaper."You are certainly a model client. You have the correct intuition.Let us see, now." He spread out the papers upon the table, and gavelittle darting glances from one to the other. "They are disguisedhands, except the letter," he said, presently, "but there can be noquestion as to the authorship. See how the irrepressible Greek e willbreak out, and see the twirl of the final s. They are undoubtedly bythe same person. I should not like to suggest false hopes, MissMorstan, but is there any resemblance between this hand and that ofyour father?""Nothing could be more unlike.""I expected to hear you say so. We shall look out for you, then, atsix. Pray allow me to keep the papers. I may look into the matterbefore then. It is only half-past three. Au revoir, then.""Au revoir," said our visitor, and, with a bright, kindly glance fromone to the other of us, she replaced her pearl-box in her bosom andhurried away. Standing at the window, I watched her walking brisklydown the street, until the gray turban and white feather were but aspeck in the sombre crowd."What a very attractive woman!" I exclaimed, turning to my companion.He had lit his pipe again, and was leaning back with droopingeyelids. "Is she?" he said, languidly. "I did not observe.""You really are an automaton,--a calculating-machine!" I cried."There is something positively inhuman in you at times."He smiled gently. "It is of the first importance," he said, "not toallow your judgment to be biased by personal qualities. A client isto me a mere unit,--a factor in a problem. The emotional qualitiesare antagonistic to clear reasoning. I assure you that the mostwinning woman I ever knew was hanged for poisoning three littlechildren for their insurance-money, and the most repellant man of myacquaintance is a philanthropist who has spent nearly a quarter of amillion upon the London poor.""In this case, however--""I never make exceptions. An exception disproves the rule. Have youever had occasion to study character in handwriting? What do you makeof this fellow's scribble?""It is legible and regular," I answered. "A man of business habitsand some force of character."Holmes shook his head. "Look at his long letters," he said. "Theyhardly rise above the common herd. That d might be an a, and that lan e. Men of character always differentiate their long letters,however illegibly they may write. There is vacillation in his k's andself-esteem in his capitals. I am going out now. I have some fewreferences to make. Let me recommend this book,--one of the mostremarkable ever penned. It is Winwood Reade's Martyrdom of Man. Ishall be back in an hour."I sat in the window with the volume in my hand, but my thoughts werefar from the daring speculations of the writer. My mind ran upon ourlate visitor,--her smiles, the deep rich tones of her voice, thestrange mystery which overhung her life. If she were seventeen at thetime of her father's disappearance she must be seven-and-twentynow,--a sweet age, when youth has lost its self-consciousness andbecome a little sobered by experience. So I sat and mused, until suchdangerous thoughts came into my head that I hurried away to my deskand plunged furiously into the latest treatise upon pathology. Whatwas I, an army surgeon with a weak leg and a weaker banking-account,that I should dare to think of such things? She was a unit, afactor,--nothing more. If my future were black, it was better surelyto face it like a man than to attempt to brighten it by merewill-o'-the-wisps of the imagination. CHAPTER III In Quest of a SolutionIt was half-past five before Holmes returned. He was bright, eager,and in excellent spirits,--a mood which in his case alternated withfits of the blackest depression."There is no great mystery in this matter," he said, taking the cupof tea which I had poured out for him. "The facts appear to admit ofonly one explanation.""What! you have solved it already?""Well, that would be too much to say. I have discovered a suggestivefact, that is all. It is, however, very suggestive. The details arestill to be added. I have just found, on consulting the back files ofthe Times, that Major Sholto, of Upper Norword, late of the 34thBombay Infantry, died upon the 28th of April, 1882.""I may be very obtuse, Holmes, but I fail to see what this suggests.""No? You surprise me. Look at it in this way, then. Captain Morstandisappears. The only person in London whom he could have visited isMajor Sholto. Major Sholto denies having heard that he was in London.Four years later Sholto dies. Within a week of his death CaptainMorstan's daughter receives a valuable present, which is repeatedfrom year to year, and now culminates in a letter which describes heras a wronged woman. What wrong can it refer to except thisdeprivation of her father? And why should the presents beginimmediately after Sholto's death, unless it is that Sholto's heirknows something of the mystery and desires to make compensation? Haveyou any alternative theory which will meet the facts?""But what a strange compensation! And how strangely made! Why, too,should he write a letter now, rather than six years ago? Again, theletter speaks of giving her justice. What justice can she have? It istoo much to suppose that her father is still alive. There is no otherinjustice in her case that you know of.""There are difficulties; there are certainly difficulties," saidSherlock Holmes, pensively. "But our expedition of to-night willsolve them all. Ah, here is a four-wheeler, and Miss Morstan isinside. Are you all ready? Then we had better go down, for it is alittle past the hour."I picked up my hat and my heaviest stick, but I observed that Holmestook his revolver from his drawer and slipped it into his pocket. Itwas clear that he thought that our night's work might be a seriousone.Miss Morstan was muffled in a dark cloak, and her sensitive face wascomposed, but pale. She must have been more than woman if she did notfeel some uneasiness at the strange enterprise upon which we wereembarking, yet her self-control was perfect, and she readily answeredthe few additional questions which Sherlock Holmes put to her."Major Sholto was a very particular friend of papa's," she said. "Hisletters were full of allusions to the major. He and papa were incommand of the troops at the Andaman Islands, so they were thrown agreat deal together. By the way, a curious paper was found in papa'sdesk which no one could understand. I don't suppose that it is of theslightest importance, but I thought you might care to see it, so Ibrought it with me. It is here."Holmes unfolded the paper carefully and smoothed it out upon hisknee. He then very methodically examined it all over with his doublelens."It is paper of native Indian manufacture," he remarked. "It has atsome time been pinned to a board. The diagram upon it appears to be aplan of part of a large building with numerous halls, corridors, andpassages. At one point is a small cross done in red ink, and above itis '3.37 from left,' in faded pencil-writing.In the left-handcorner is a curious hieroglyphic like four crosses in a line withtheir arms touching. Beside it is written, in very rough and coarsecharacters, 'The sign of the four,--Jonathan Small, Mahomet Singh,Abdullah Khan, Dost Akbar.' No, I confess that I do not see how thisbears upon the matter. Yet it is evidently a document of importance.It has been kept carefully in a pocket-book; for the one side is asclean as the other.""It was in his pocket-book that we found it.""Preserve it carefully, then, Miss Morstan, for it may prove to be ofuse to us. I begin to suspect that this matter may turn out to bemuch deeper and more subtle than I at first supposed. I mustreconsider my ideas." He leaned back in the cab, and I could see byhis drawn brow and his vacant eye that he was thinking intently. MissMorstan and I chatted in an undertone about our present expeditionand its possible outcome, but our companion maintained hisimpenetrable reserve until the end of our journey.It was a September evening, and not yet seven o'clock, but the dayhad been a dreary one, and a dense drizzly fog lay low upon the greatcity. Mud-colored clouds drooped sadly over the muddy streets. Downthe Strand the lamps were but misty splotches of diffused light whichthrew a feeble circular glimmer upon the slimy pavement. The yellowglare from the shop-windows streamed out into the steamy, vaporousair, and threw a murky, shifting radiance across the crowdedthoroughfare. There was, to my mind, something eerie and ghost-likein the endless procession of faces which flitted across these narrowbars of light,--sad faces and glad, haggard and merry. Like all humankind, they flitted from the gloom into the light, and so back intothe gloom once more. I am not subject to impressions, but the dull,heavy evening, with the strange business upon which we were engaged,combined to make me nervous and depressed. I could see from MissMorstan's manner that she was suffering from the same feeling. Holmesalone could rise superior to petty influences. He held his opennote-book upon his knee, and from time to time he jotted down figuresand memoranda in the light of his pocket-lantern.At the Lyceum Theatre the crowds were already thick at theside-entrances. In front a continuous stream of hansoms andfour-wheelers were rattling up, discharging their cargoes ofshirt-fronted men and beshawled, bediamonded women. We had hardlyreached the third pillar, which was our rendezvous, before a small,dark, brisk man in the dress of a coachman accosted us."Are you the parties who come with Miss Morstan?" he asked."I am Miss Morstan, and these two gentlemen are my friends," saidshe.He bent a pair of wonderfully penetrating and questioning eyes uponus. "You will excuse me, miss," he said with a certain dogged manner,"but I was to ask you to give me your word that neither of yourcompanions is a police-officer.""I give you my word on that," she answered.He gave a shrill whistle, on which a street Arab led across afour-wheeler and opened the door. The man who had addressed usmounted to the box, while we took our places inside. We had hardlydone so before the driver whipped up his horse, and we plunged awayat a furious pace through the foggy streets.The situation was a curious one. We were driving to an unknown place,on an unknown errand. Yet our invitation was either a completehoax,--which was an inconceivable hypothesis,--or else we had goodreason to think that important issues might hang upon our journey.Miss Morstan's demeanor was as resolute and collected as ever. Iendeavored to cheer and amuse her by reminiscences of my adventuresin Afghanistan; but, to tell the truth, I was myself so excited atour situation and so curious as to our destination that my storieswere slightly involved. To this day she declares that I told her onemoving anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the dead ofnight, and how I fired a double-barrelled tiger cub at it. At first Ihad some idea as to the direction in which we were driving; but soon,what with our pace, the fog, and my own limited knowledge of London,I lost my bearings, and knew nothing, save that we seemed to be goinga very long way. Sherlock Holmes was never at fault, however, and hemuttered the names as the cab rattled through squares and in and outby tortuous by-streets."Rochester Row," said he. "Now Vincent Square. Now we come out on theVauxhall Bridge Road. We are making for the Surrey side, apparently.Yes, I thought so. Now we are on the bridge. You can catch glimpsesof the river."We did indeed bet a fleeting view of a stretch of the Thames with thelamps shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab dashed on,and was soon involved in a labyrinth of streets upon the other side."Wordsworth Road," said my companion. "Priory Road. Lark Hall Lane.Stockwell Place. Robert Street. Cold Harbor Lane. Our quest does notappear to take us to very fashionable regions."We had, indeed, reached a questionable and forbidding neighborhood.Long lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by the coarseglare and tawdry brilliancy of public houses at the corner. Then camerows of two-storied villas each with a fronting of miniature garden,and then again interminable lines of new staring brickbuildings,--the monster tentacles which the giant city was throwingout into the country. At last the cab drew up at the third house in anew terrace. None of the other houses were inhabited, and that atwhich we stopped was as dark as its neighbors, save for a singleglimmer in the kitchen window. On our knocking, however, the door wasinstantly thrown open by a Hindoo servant clad in a yellow turban,white loose-fitting clothes, and a yellow sash. There was somethingstrangely incongruous in this Oriental figure framed in thecommonplace door-way of a third-rate suburban dwelling-house."The Sahib awaits you," said he, and even as he spoke there came ahigh piping voice from some inner room. "Show them in to me,khitmutgar," it cried. "Show them straight in to me." CHAPTER IV The Story of the Bald-Headed ManWe followed the Indian down a sordid and common passage, ill lit andworse furnished, until he came to a door upon the right, which hethrew open. A blaze of yellow light streamed out upon us, and in thecentre of the glare there stood a small man with a very high head, abristle of red hair all round the fringe of it, and a bald, shiningscalp which shot out from among it like a mountain-peak fromfir-trees. He writhed his hands together as he stood, and hisfeatures were in a perpetual jerk, now smiling, now scowling, butnever for an instant in repose. Nature had given him a pendulous lip,and a too visible line of yellow and irregular teeth, which he strovefeebly to conceal by constantly passing his hand over the lower partof his face. In spite of his obtrusive baldness, he gave theimpression of youth. In point of fact he had just turned histhirtieth year."Your servant, Miss Morstan," he kept repeating, in a thin, highvoice. "Your servant, gentlemen. Pray step into my little sanctum. Asmall place, miss, but furnished to my own liking.An oasis of artin the howling desert of South London."We were all astonished by the appearance of the apartment into whichhe invited us. In that sorry house it looked as out of place as adiamond of the first water in a setting of brass. The richest andglossiest of curtains and tapestries draped the walls, looped backhere and there to expose some richly-mounted painting or Orientalvase. The carpet was of amber-and-black, so soft and so thick thatthe foot sank pleasantly into it, as into a bed of moss. Two greattiger-skins thrown athwart it increased the suggestion of Easternluxury, as did a huge hookah which stood upon a mat in the corner. Alamp in the fashion of a silver dove was hung from an almostinvisible golden wire in the centre of the room. As it burned itfilled the air with a subtle and aromatic odor."Mr. Thaddeus Sholto," said the little man, still jerking andsmiling. "That is my name. You are Miss Morstan, of course. And thesegentlemen--""This is Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and this is Dr. Watson.""A doctor, eh?" cried he, much excited. "Have you your stethoscope?Might I ask you--would you have the kindness? I have grave doubts asto my mitral valve, if you would be so very good. The aortic I mayrely upon, but I should value your opinion upon the mitral."I listened to his heart, as requested, but was unable to findanything amiss, save indeed that he was in an ecstasy of fear, for heshivered from head to foot. "It appears to be normal," I said. "Youhave no cause for uneasiness.""You will excuse my anxiety, Miss Morstan," he remarked, airily."Iam a great sufferer, and I have long had suspicions as to that valve.I am delighted to hear that they are unwarranted. Had your father,Miss Morstan, refrained from throwing a strain upon his heart, hemight have been alive now."I could have struck the man across the face, so hot was I at thiscallous and off-hand reference to so delicate a matter. Miss Morstansat down, and her face grew white to the lips. "I knew in my heartthat he was dead," said she."I can give you every information," said he, "and, what is more, Ican do you justice; and I will, too, whatever Brother Bartholomew maysay. I am so glad to have your friends here, not only as an escort toyou, but also as witnesses to what I am about to do and say. Thethree of us can show a bold front to Brother Bartholomew. But let ushave no outsiders,--no police or officials. We can settle everythingsatisfactorily among ourselves, without any interference. Nothingwould annoy Brother Bartholomew more than any publicity." He sat downupon a low settee and blinked at us inquiringly with his weak, wateryblue eyes."For my part," said Holmes, "whatever you may choose to say will gono further."I nodded to show my agreement."That is well! That is well!" said he. "May I offer you a glass ofChianti, Miss Morstan? Or of Tokay? I keep no other wines. Shall Iopen a flask? No? Well, then, I trust that you have no objection totobacco-smoke, to the mild balsamic odor of the Eastern tobacco. I ama little nervous, and I find my hookah an invaluable sedative." Heapplied a taper to the great bowl, and the smoke bubbled merrilythrough the rose-water. We sat all three in a semicircle, with ourheads advanced, and our chins upon our hands, while the strange,jerky little fellow, with his high, shining head, puffed uneasily inthe centre."When I first determined to make this communication to you," said he,"I might have given you my address, but I feared that you mightdisregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you. I took theliberty, therefore, of making an appointment in such a way that myman Williams might be able to see you first. I have completeconfidence in his discretion, and he had orders, if he weredissatisfied, to proceed no further in the matter. You will excusethese precautions, but I am a man of somewhat retiring, and I mighteven say refined, tastes, and there is nothing more unaesthetic thana policeman. I have a natural shrinking from all forms of roughmaterialism. I seldom come in contact with the rough crowd. I live,as you see, with some little atmosphere of elegance around me. I maycall myself a patron of the arts. It is my weakness. The landscape isa genuine Corot, and, though a connoisseur might perhaps throw adoubt upon that Salvator Rosa, there cannot be the least questionabout the Bouguereau. I am partial to the modern French school.""You will excuse me, Mr. Sholto," said Miss Morstan, "but I am hereat your request to learn something which you desire to tell me. It isvery late, and I should desire the interview to be as short aspossible.""At the best it must take some time," he answered; "for we shallcertainly have to go to Norwood and see Brother Bartholomew. We shallall go and try if we can get the better of Brother Bartholomew. He isvery angry with me for taking the course which has seemed right tome. I had quite high words with him last night. You cannot imaginewhat a terrible fellow he is when he is angry.""If we are to go to Norwood it would perhaps be as well to start atonce," I ventured to remark.He laughed until his ears were quite red. "That would hardly do," hecried. "I don't know what he would say if I brought you in thatsudden way. No, I must prepare you by showing you how we all stand toeach other. In the first place, I must tell you that there areseveral points in the story of which I am myself ignorant. I can onlylay the facts before you as far as I know them myself."My father was, as you may have guessed, Major John Sholto, once ofthe Indian army. He retired some eleven years ago, and came to liveat Pondicherry Lodge in Upper Norwood. He had prospered in India, andbrought back with him a considerable sum of money, a large collectionof valuable curiosities, and a staff of native servants. With theseadvantages he bought himself a house, and lived in great luxury. Mytwin-brother Bartholomew and I were the only children."I very well remember the sensation which was caused by thedisappearance of Captain Morstan. We read the details in the papers,and, knowing that he had been a friend of our father's, we discussedthe case freely in his presence. He used to join in our speculationsas to what could have happened. Never for an instant did we suspectthat he had the whole secret hidden in his own breast,--that of allmen he alone knew the fate of Arthur Morstan."We did know, however, that some mystery--some positivedanger--overhung our father. He was very fearful of going out alone,and he always employed two prize-fighters to act as porters atPondicherry Lodge. Williams, who drove you to-night, was one of them.He was once light-weight champion of England. Our father would nevertell us what it was he feared, but he had a most marked aversion tomen with wooden legs. On one occasion he actually fired his revolverat a wooden-legged man, who proved to be a harmless tradesmancanvassing for orders. We had to pay a large sum to hush the matterup. My brother and I used to think this a mere whim of my father's,but events have since led us to change our opinion."Early in 1882 my father received a letter from India which was agreat shock to him. He nearly fainted at the breakfast-table when heopened it, and from that day he sickened to his death. What was inthe letter we could never discover, but I could see as he held itthat it was short and written in a scrawling hand. He had sufferedfor years from an enlarged spleen, but he now became rapidly worse,and towards the end of April we were informed that he was beyond allhope, and that he wished to make a last communication to us."When we entered his room he was propped up with pillows andbreathing heavily. He besought us to lock the door and to come uponeither side of the bed. Then, grasping our hands, he made aremarkable statement to us, in a voice which was broken as much byemotion as by pain. I shall try and give it to you in his own verywords."'I have only one thing,' he said, 'which weighs upon my mind at thissupreme moment. It is my treatment of poor Morstan's orphan. Thecursed greed which has been my besetting sin through life haswithheld from her the treasure, half at least of which should havebeen hers. And yet I have made no use of it myself,--so blind andfoolish a thing is avarice. The mere feeling of possession has beenso dear to me that I could not bear to share it with another. Seethat chaplet dipped with pearls beside the quinine-bottle. Even thatI could not bear to part with, although I had got it out with thedesign of sending it to her. You, my sons, will give her a fair shareof the Agra treasure. But send her nothing--not even thechaplet--until I am gone. After all, men have been as bad as this andhave recovered."'I will tell you how Morstan died,' he continued. 'He had sufferedfor years from a weak heart, but he concealed it from every one. Ialone knew it. When in India, he and I, through a remarkable chain ofcircumstances, came into possession of a considerable treasure. Ibrought it over to England, and on the night of Morstan's arrival hecame straight over here to claim his share. He walked over from thestation, and was admitted by my faithful Lal Chowdar, who is nowdead. Morstan and I had a difference of opinion as to the division ofthe treasure, and we came to heated words. Morstan had sprung out ofhis chair in a paroxysm of anger, when he suddenly pressed his handto his side, his face turned a dusky hue, and he fell backwards,cutting his head against the corner of the treasure-chest. When Istooped over him I found, to my horror, that he was dead."'For a long time I sat half distracted, wondering what I should do.My first impulse was, of course, to call for assistance; but I couldnot but recognize that there was every chance that I would be accusedof his murder. His death at the moment of a quarrel, and the gash inhis head, would be black against me. Again, an official inquiry couldnot be made without bringing out some facts about the treasure, whichI was particularly anxious to keep secret. He had told me that nosoul upon earth knew where he had gone. There seemed to be nonecessity why any soul ever should know."'I was still pondering over the matter, when, looking up, I saw myservant, Lal Chowdar, in the doorway. He stole in and bolted the doorbehind him. "Do not fear, Sahib," he said. "No one need know that youhave killed him. Let us hide him away, and who is the wiser?" "I didnot kill him," said I. Lal Chowdar shook his head and smiled. "Iheard it all, Sahib," said he. "I heard you quarrel, and I heard theblow. But my lips are sealed. All are asleep in the house. Let us puthim away together." That was enough to decide met. If my own servantcould not believe my innocence, how could I hope to make it goodbefore twelve foolish tradesmen in a jury-box? Lal Chowdar and Idisposed of the body that night, and within a few days the Londonpapers were full of the mysterious disappearance of Captain Morstan.You will see from what I say that I can hardly be blamed in thematter. My fault lies in the fact that we concealed not only thebody, but also the treasure, and that I have clung to Morstan's shareas well as to my own. I wish you, therefore, to make restitution. Putyour ears down to my mouth. The treasure is hidden in--At thisinstant a horrible change came over his expression; his eyes staredwildly, his jaw dropped, and he yelled, in a voice which I can neverforget, 'Keep him out! For Christ's sake keep him out'! We bothstared round at the window behind us upon which his gaze was fixed. Aface was looking in at us out of the darkness. We could see thewhitening of the nose where it was pressed against the glass. It wasa bearded, hairy face, with wild cruel eyes and an expression ofconcentrated malevolence. My brother and I rushed towards the window,but the man was gone. When we returned to my father his head haddropped and his pulse had ceased to beat."We searched the garden that night, but found no sign of theintruder, save that just under the window a single footmark wasvisible in the flower-bed. But for that one trace, we might havethought that our imaginations had conjured up that wild, fierce face.We soon, however, had another and a more striking proof that therewere secret agencies at work all round us. The window of my father'sroom was found open in the morning, his cupboards and boxes had beenrifled, and upon his chest was fixed a torn piece of paper, with thewords 'The sign of the four' scrawled across it. What the phrasemeant, or who our secret visitor may have been, we never knew. As faras we can judge, none of my father's property had been actuallystolen, though everything had been turned out. My brother and Inaturally associated this peculiar incident with the fear whichhaunted my father during his life; but it is still a complete mysteryto us."The little man stopped to relight his hookah and puffed thoughtfullyfor a few moments. We had all sat absorbed, listening to hisextraordinary narrative. At the short account of her father's deathMiss Morstan had turned deadly white, and for a moment I feared thatshe was about to faint. She rallied however, on drinking a glass ofwater which I quietly poured out for her from a Venetian carafe uponthe side-table. Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair with anabstracted expression and the lids drawn low over his glitteringeyes. As I glanced at him I could not but think how on that very dayhe had complained bitterly of the commonplaceness of life. Here atleast was a problem which would tax his sagacity to the utmost. Mr.Thaddeus Sholto looked from one to the other of us with an obviouspride at the effect which his story had produced, and then continuedbetween the puffs of his overgrown pipe."My brother and I," said he, "were, as you may imagine, much excitedas to the treasure which my father had spoken of. For weeks and formonths we dug and delved in every part of the garden, withoutdiscovering its whereabouts. It was maddening to think that thehiding-place was on his very lips at the moment that he died. Wecould judge the splendor of the missing riches by the chaplet whichhe had taken out. Over this chaplet my brother Bartholomew and I hadsome little discussion. The pearls were evidently of great value, andhe was averse to part with them, for, between friends, my brother washimself a little inclined to my father's fault. He thought, too, thatif we parted with the chaplet it might give rise to gossip andfinally bring us into trouble. It was all that I could do to persuadehim to let me find out Miss Morstan's address and send her a detachedpearl at fixed intervals, so that at least she might never feeldestitute.""It was a kindly thought," said our companion, earnestly. "It wasextremely good of you."The little man waved his hand deprecatingly. "We were your trustees,"he said. "That was the view which I took of it, though BrotherBartholomew could not altogether see it in that light. We had plentyof money ourselves. I desired no more. Besides, it would have beensuch bad taste to have treated a young lady in so scurvy a fashion.'Le mauvais goût mène au crime.' The French have a very neat way ofputting these things. Our difference of opinion on this subject wentso far that I thought it best to set up rooms for myself: so I leftPondicherry Lodge, taking the old khitmutgar and Williams with me.Yesterday, however, I learn that an event of extreme importance hasoccurred. The treasure has been discovered. I instantly communicatedwith Miss Morstan, and it only remains for us to drive out to Norwoodand demand our share. I explained my views last night to BrotherBartholomew: so we shall be expected, if not welcome, visitors."Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased, and sat twitching on his luxurioussettee. We all remained silent, with our thoughts upon the newdevelopment which the mysterious business had taken. Holmes was thefirst to spring to his feet."You have done well, sir, from first to last," said he. "It ispossible that we may be able to make you some small return bythrowing some light upon that which is still dark to you. But, asMiss Morstan remarked just now, it is late, and we had best put thematter through without delay."Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of hishookah, and produced from behind a curtain a very long befroggedtopcoat with Astrakhan collar and cuffs. This he buttoned tightly up,in spite of the extreme closeness of the night, and finished hisattire by putting on a rabbit-skin cap with hanging lappets whichcovered the ears, so that no part of him was visible save his mobileand peaky face. "My health is somewhat fragile," he remarked, as heled the way down the passage. "I am compelled to be avaletudinarian."Our cab was awaiting us outside, and our programme was evidentlyprearranged, for the driver started off at once at a rapid pace.Thaddeus Sholto talked incessantly, in a voice which rose high abovethe rattle of the wheels."Bartholomew is a clever fellow," said he. "How do you think he foundout where the treasure was? He had come to the conclusion that it wassomewhere indoors: so he worked out all the cubic space of the house,and made measurements everywhere, so that not one inch should beunaccounted for. Among other things, he found that the height of thebuilding was seventy-four feet, but on adding together the heights ofall the separate rooms, and making every allowance for the spacebetween, which he ascertained by borings, he could not bring thetotal to more than seventy feet. There were four feet unaccountedfor. These could only be at the top of the building. He knocked ahole, therefore, in the lath-and-plaster ceiling of the highest room,and there, sure enough, he came upon another little garret above it,which had been sealed up and was known to no one. In the centre stoodthe treasure-chest, resting upon two rafters. He lowered it throughthe hole, and there it lies. He computes the value of the jewels atnot less than half a million sterling."At the mention of this gigantic sum we all stared at one anotheropen-eyed. Miss Morstan, could we secure her rights, would changefrom a needy governess to the richest heiress in England. Surely itwas the place of a loyal friend to rejoice at such news; yet I amashamed to say that selfishness took me by the soul, and that myheart turned as heavy as lead within me. I stammered out some fewhalting words of congratulation, and then sat downcast, with my headdrooped, deaf to the babble of our new acquaintance. He was clearly aconfirmed hypochondriac, and I was dreamily conscious that he waspouring forth interminable trains of symptoms, and imploringinformation as to the composition and action of innumerable quacknostrums, some of which he bore about in a leather case in hispocket. I trust that he may not remember any of the answers which Igave him that night. Holmes declares that he overheard me caution himagainst the great danger of taking more than two drops of castor oil,while I recommended strychnine in large doses as a sedative. Howeverthat may be, I was certainly relieved when our cab pulled up with ajerk and the coachman sprang down to open the door."This, Miss Morstan, is Pondicherry Lodge," said Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,as he handed her out. CHAPTER V The Tragedy of Pondicherry LodgeIt was nearly eleven o'clock when we reached this final stage of ournight's adventures. We had left the damp fog of the great city behindus, and the night was fairly fine. A warm wind blew from thewestward, and heavy clouds moved slowly across the sky, with half amoon peeping occasionally through the rifts. It was clear enough tosee for some distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of theside-lamps from the carriage to give us a better light upon our way.Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds, and was girt round with avery high stone wall topped with broken glass. A single narrowiron-clamped door formed the only means of entrance. On this ourguide knocked with a peculiar postman-like rat-tat."Who is there?" cried a gruff voice from within."It is I, McMurdo. You surely know my knock by this time."There was a grumbling sound and a clanking and jarring of keys. Thedoor swung heavily back, and a short, deep-chested man stood in theopening, with the yellow light of the lantern shining upon hisprotruded face and twinkling distrustful eyes."That you, Mr. Thaddeus? But who are the others? I had no ordersabout them from the master.""No, McMurdo? You surprise me! I told my brother last night that Ishould bring some friends."He ain't been out o' his room to-day, Mr. Thaddeus, and I have noorders. You know very well that I must stick to regulations. I canlet you in, but your friends must just stop where they are."This was an unexpected obstacle. Thaddeus Sholto looked about him ina perplexed and helpless manner. "This is too bad of you, McMurdo!"he said. "If I guarantee them, that is enough for you. There is theyoung lady, too. She cannot wait on the public road at this hour.""Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus," said the porter, inexorably. "Folk may befriends o' yours, and yet no friends o' the master's. He pays me wellto do my duty, and my duty I'll do. I don't know none o' yourfriends.""Oh, yes you do, McMurdo," cried Sherlock Holmes, genially. "I don'tthink you can have forgotten me. Don't you remember the amateur whofought three rounds with you at Alison's rooms on the night of yourbenefit four years back?""Not Mr. Sherlock Holmes!" roared the prize-fighter. "God's truth!how could I have mistook you? If instead o' standin' there so quietyou had just stepped up and given me that cross-hit of yours underthe jaw, I'd ha' known you without a question. Ah, you're one thathas wasted your gifts, you have! You might have aimed high, if youhad joined the fancy.""You see, Watson, if all else fails me I have still one of thescientific professions open to me," said Holmes, laughing. "Ourfriend won't keep us out in the cold now, I am sure.""In you come, sir, in you come,--you and your friends," he answered."Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus, but orders are very strict. Had to becertain of your friends before I let them in."Inside, a gravel path wound through desolate grounds to a huge clumpof a house, square and prosaic, all plunged in shadow save where amoonbeam struck one corner and glimmered in a garret window. The vastsize of the building, with its gloom and its deathly silence, strucka chill to the heart. Even Thaddeus Sholto seemed ill at ease, andthe lantern quivered and rattled in his hand."I cannot understand it," he said. "There must be some mistake. Idistinctly told Bartholomew that we should be here, and yet there isno light in his window. I do not know what to make of it.""Does he always guard the premises in this way?" asked Holmes."Yes; he has followed my father's custom. He was the favorite son,you know, and I sometimes think that my father may have told him morethan he ever told me. That is Bartholomew's window up there where themoonshine strikes. It is quite bright, but there is no light fromwithin, I think.""None," said Holmes. "But I see the glint of a light in that littlewindow beside the door.""Ah, that is the housekeeper's room. That is where old Mrs. Bernstonesits. She can tell us all about it. But perhaps you would not mindwaiting here for a minute or two, for if we all go in together andshe has no word of our coming she may be alarmed. But hush! what isthat?"He held up the lantern, and his hand shook until the circles of lightflickered and wavered all round us. Miss Morstan seized my wrist, andwe all stood with thumping hearts, straining our ears. From the greatblack house there sounded through the silent night the saddest andmost pitiful of sounds,--the shrill, broken whimpering of afrightened woman."It is Mrs. Bernstone," said Sholto. "She is the only woman in thehouse. Wait here. I shall be back in a moment." He hurried for thedoor, and knocked in his peculiar way. We could see a tall old womanadmit him, and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him."Oh, Mr. Thaddeus, sir, I am so glad you have come! I am so glad youhave come, Mr. Thaddeus, sir!" We heard her reiterated rejoicingsuntil the door was closed and her voice died away into a muffledmonotone.Our guide had left us the lantern. Holmes swung it slowly round, andpeered keenly at the house, and at the great rubbish-heaps whichcumbered the grounds. Miss Morstan and I stood together, and her handwas in mine. A wondrous subtle thing is love, for here were we twowho had never seen each other before that day, between whom no wordor even look of affection had ever passed, and yet now in an hour oftrouble our hands instinctively sought for each other. I havemarvelled at it since, but at the time it seemed the most naturalthing that I should go out to her so, and, as she has often told me,there was in her also the instinct to turn to me for comfort andprotection. So we stood hand in hand, like two children, and therewas peace in our hearts for all the dark things that surrounded us."What a strange place!" she said, looking round."It looks as though all the moles in England had been let loose init. I have seen something of the sort on the side of a hill nearBallarat, where the prospectors had been at work.""And from the same cause," said Holmes. "These are the traces of thetreasure-seekers. You must remember that they were six years lookingfor it. No wonder that the grounds look like a gravel-pit."At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholtocame running out, with his hands thrown forward and terror in hiseyes."There is something amiss with Bartholomew!" he cried. "I amfrightened! My nerves cannot stand it." He was, indeed, halfblubbering with fear, and his twitching feeble face peeping out fromthe great Astrakhan collar had the helpless appealing expression of aterrified child."Come into the house," said Holmes, in his crisp, firm way."Yes, do!" pleaded Thaddeus Sholto. "I really do not feel equal togiving directions."We all followed him into the housekeeper's room, which stood upon theleft-hand side of the passage. The old woman was pacing up and downwith a scared look and restless picking fingers, but the sight ofMiss Morstan appeared to have a soothing effect upon her."God bless your sweet calm face!" she cried, with an hysterical sob."It does me good to see you. Oh, but I have been sorely tried thisday!"Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some fewwords of kindly womanly comfort which brought the color back into theothers bloodless cheeks."Master has locked himself in and will now answer me," she explained."All day I have waited to hear from him, for he often likes to bealone; but an hour ago I feared that something was amiss, so I wentup and peeped through the key-hole. You must go up, Mr.Thaddeus,--you must go up and look for yourself. I have seen Mr.Bartholomew Sholto in joy and in sorrow for ten long years, but Inever saw him with such a face on him as that."Sherlock Holmes took the lamp and led the way, for Thaddeus Sholto'steeth were chattering in his head. So shaken was he that I had topass my hand under his arm as we went up the stairs, for his kneeswere trembling under him. Twice as we ascended Holmes whipped hislens out of his pocket and carefully examined marks which appeared tome to be mere shapeless smudges of dust upon the cocoa-nut mattingwhich served as a stair-carpet. He walked slowly from step to step,holding the lamp, and shooting keen glances to right and left. MissMorstan had remained behind with the frightened housekeeper.The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of somelength, with a great picture in Indian tapestry upon the right of itand three doors upon the left. Holmes advanced along it in the sameslow and methodical way, while we kept close at his heels, with ourlong black shadows streaming backwards down the corridor. The thirddoor was that which we were seeking. Holmes knocked without receivingany answer, and then tried to turn the handle and force it open. Itwas locked on the inside, however, and by a broad and powerful bolt,as we could see when we set our lamp up against it. The key beingturned, however, the hole was not entirely closed. Sherlock Holmesbent down to it, and instantly rose again with a sharp intaking ofthe breath."There is something devilish in this, Watson," said he, more movedthan I had ever before seen him. "What do you make of it?"I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror. Moonlight wasstreaming into the room, and it was bright with a vague and shiftyradiance. Looking straight at me, and suspended, as it were, in theair, for all beneath was in shadow, there hung a face,--the very faceof our companion Thaddeus. There was the same high, shining head, thesame circular bristle of red hair, the same bloodless countenance.The features were set, however, in a horrible smile, a fixed andunnatural grin, which in that still and moonlit room was more jarringto the nerves than any scowl or contortion. So like was the face tothat of our little friend that I looked round at him to make surethat he was indeed with us. Then I recalled to mind that he hadmentioned to us that his brother and he were twins."This is terrible!" I said to Holmes. "What is to be done?""The door must come down," he answered, and, springing against it, heput all his weight upon the lock. It creaked and groaned, but did notyield. Together we flung ourselves upon it once more, and this timeit gave way with a sudden snap, and we found ourselves withinBartholomew Sholto's chamber.It appeared to have been fitted up as a chemical laboratory. A doubleline of glass-stoppered bottles was drawn up upon the wall oppositethe door, and the table was littered over with Bunsen burners,test-tubes, and retorts. In the corners stood carboys of acid inwicker baskets. One of these appeared to leak or to have been broken,for a stream of dark-colored liquid had trickled out from it, and theair was heavy with a peculiarly pungent, tar-like odor. A set ofsteps stood at one side of the room, in the midst of a litter of lathand plaster, and above them there was an opening in the ceiling largeenough for a man to pass through. At the foot of the steps a longcoil of rope was thrown carelessly together.By the table, in a wooden arm-chair, the master of the house wasseated all in a heap, with his head sunk upon his left shoulder, andthat ghastly, inscrutable smile upon his face. He was stiff and cold,and had clearly been dead many hours. It seemed to me that not onlyhis features but all his limbs were twisted and turned in the mostfantastic fashion. By his hand upon the table there lay a peculiarinstrument,--a brown, close-grained stick, with a stone head like ahammer, rudely lashed on with coarse twine. Beside it was a tornsheet of note-paper with some words scrawled upon it. Holmes glancedat it, and then handed it to me."You see," he said, with a significant raising of the eyebrows.In the light of the lantern I read, with a thrill of horror, "Thesign of the four.""In God's name, what does it all mean?" I asked."It means murder," said he, stooping over the dead man. "Ah, Iexpected it. Look here!" He pointed to what looked like a long, darkthorn stuck in the skin just above the ear."It looks like a thorn," said I."It is a thorn. You may pick it out. But be careful, for it ispoisoned."I took it up between my finger and thumb. It came away from the skinso readily that hardly any mark was left behind. One tiny speck ofblood showed where the puncture had been."This is all an insoluble mystery to me," said I. "It grows darkerinstead of clearer.""On the contrary," he answered, "it clears every instant. I onlyrequire a few missing links to have an entirely connected case."We had almost forgotten our companion's presence since we entered thechamber. He was still standing in the door-way, the very picture ofterror, wringing his hands and moaning to himself. Suddenly, however,he broke out into a sharp, querulous cry."The treasure is gone!" he said. "They have robbed him of thetreasure! There is the hole through which we lowered it. I helped himto do it! I was the last person who saw him! I left him here lastnight, and I heard him lock the door as I came down-stairs.""What time was that?""It was ten o'clock. And now he is dead, and the police will becalled in, and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in it. Oh,yes, I am sure I shall. But you don't think so, gentlemen? Surely youdon't think that it was I? Is it likely that I would have brought youhere if it were I? Oh, dear! oh, dear! I know that I shall go mad!"He jerked his arms and stamped his feet in a kind of convulsivefrenzy."You have no reason for fear, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes, kindly,putting his hand upon his shoulder. "Take my advice, and drive downto the station to report this matter to the police. Offer to assistthem in every way. We shall wait here until your return."The little man obeyed in a half-stupefied fashion, and we heard himstumbling down the stairs in the dark. CHAPTER VI Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration"Now, Watson," said Holmes, rubbing his hands, "we have half an hourto ourselves. Let us make good use of it. My case is, as I have toldyou, almost complete; but we must not err on the side ofover-confidence. Simple as the case seems now, there may be somethingdeeper underlying it.""Simple!" I ejaculated."Surely," said he, with something of the air of a clinical professorexpounding to his class. "Just sit in the corner there, that yourfootprints may not complicate matters. Now to work! In the firstplace, how did these folk come, and how did they go? The door has notbeen opened since last night. How of the window?" He carried the lampacross to it, muttering his observations aloud the while, butaddressing them to himself rather than to me. "Window is snibbed onthe inner side. Framework is solid. No hinges at the side. Let usopen it. No water-pipe near. Roof quite out of reach. Yet a man hasmounted by the window. It rained a little last night. Here is theprint of a foot in mould upon the sill. And here is a circular muddymark, and here again upon the floor, and here again by the table. Seehere, Watson! This is really a very pretty demonstration."I looked at the round, well-defined muddy discs. "This is not afootmark," said I."It is something much more valuable to us. It is the impression of awooden stump. You see here on the sill is the boot-mark, a heavy bootwith the broad metal heel, and beside it is the mark of thetimber-toe.""It is the wooden-legged man.""Quite so. But there has been some one else,--a very able andefficient ally. Could you scale that wall, doctor?"I looked out of the open window. The moon still shone brightly onthat angle of the house. We were a good sixty feet from the ground,and, look where I would, I could see no foothold, nor as much as acrevice in the brick-work."It is absolutely impossible," I answered."Without aid it is so. But suppose you had a friend up here wholowered you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, securingone end of it to this great hook in the wall. Then, I think, if youwere an active man, you might swarm up, wooden leg and all. You woulddepart, of course, in the same fashion, and your ally would draw upthe rope, untie it from the hook, shut the window, snib it on theinside, and get away in the way that he originally came. As a minorpoint it may be noted," he continued, fingering the rope, "that ourwooden-legged friend, though a fair climber, was not a professionalsailor. His hands were far from horny. My lens discloses more thanone blood-mark, especially towards the end of the rope, from which Igather that he slipped down with such velocity that he took the skinoff his hand.""This is all very well," said I, "but the thing becomes moreunintelligible than ever. How about this mysterious ally? How came heinto the room?""Yes, the ally!" repeated Holmes, pensively. "There are features ofinterest about this ally. He lifts the case from the regions of thecommonplace. I fancy that this ally breaks fresh ground in the annalsof crime in this country,--though parallel cases suggest themselvesfrom India, and, if my memory serves me, from Senegambia.""How came he, then?" I reiterated. "The door is locked, the window isinaccessible. Was it through the chimney?""The grate is much too small," he answered. "I had already consideredthat possibility.""How then?" I persisted."You will not apply my precept," he said, shaking his head. "Howoften have I said to you that when you have eliminated the impossiblewhatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth? We know thathe did not come through the door, the window, or the chimney. We alsoknow that he could not have been concealed in the room, as there isno concealment possible. Whence, then, did he come?""He came through the hole in the roof," I cried."Of course he did. He must have done so. If you will have thekindness to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our researchesto the room above,--the secret room in which the treasure was found."He mounted the steps, and, seizing a rafter with either hand, heswung himself up into the garret. Then, lying on his face, he reacheddown for the lamp and held it while I followed him.The chamber in which we found ourselves was about ten feet one wayand six the other. The floor was formed by the rafters, with thinlath-and-plaster between, so that in walking one had to step frombeam to beam. The roof ran up to an apex, and was evidently the innershell of the true roof of the house. There was no furniture of anysort, and the accumulated dust of years lay thick upon the floor."Here you are, you see," said Sherlock Holmes, putting his handagainst the sloping wall. "This is a trap-door which leads out on tothe roof. I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, slopingat a gentle angle. This, then, is the way by which Number Oneentered. Let us see if we can find one other traces of hisindividuality."He held down the lamp to the floor, and as he did so I saw for thesecond time that night a startled, surprised look come over his face.For myself, as I followed his gaze my skin was cold under my clothes.The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a nakedfoot,--clear, well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half thesize of those of an ordinary man."Holmes," I said, in a whisper, "a child has done the horrid thing."He had recovered his self-possession in an instant. "I was staggeredfor the moment," he said, "but the thing is quite natural. My memoryfailed me, or I should have been able to foretell it. There isnothing more to be learned here. Let us go down.""What is your theory, then, as to those footmarks?" I asked, eagerly,when we had regained the lower room once more."My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself," said he, with atouch of impatience. "You know my methods. Apply them, and it will beinstructive to compare results.""I cannot conceive anything which will cover the facts," I answered."It will be clear enough to you soon," he said, in an off-hand way."I think that there is nothing else of importance here, but I willlook." He whipped out his lens and a tape measure, and hurried aboutthe room on his knees, measuring, comparing, examining, with his longthin nose only a few inches from the planks, and his beady eyesgleaming and deep-set like those of a bird. So swift, silent, andfurtive were his movements, like those of a trained blood-houndpicking out a scent, that I could not but think what a terriblecriminal he would have made had he turned his energy and sagacityagainst the law, instead of exerting them in its defense. As hehunted about, he kept muttering to himself, and finally he broke outinto a loud crow of delight."We are certainly in luck," said he. "We ought to have very littletrouble now. Number One has had the misfortune to tread in thecreosote. You can see the outline of the edge of his small foot hereat the side of this evil-smelling mess. The carboy has been cracked,You see, and the stuff has leaked out.""What then?" I asked."Why, we have got him, that's all," said he. "I know a dog that wouldfollow that scent to the world's end. If a pack can track a trailedherring across a shire, how far can a specially-trained hound followso pungent a smell as this? It sounds like a sum in the rule ofthree. The answer should give us the--But halloo! here are theaccredited representatives of the law."Heavy steps and the clamor of loud voices were audible from below,and the hall door shut with a loud crash."Before they come," said Holmes, "just put your hand here on thispoor fellow's arm, and here on his leg. What do you feel?""The muscles are as hard as a board," I answered."Quite so. They are in a state of extreme contraction, far exceedingthe usual rigor mortis. Coupled with this distortion of the face,this Hippocratic smile, or 'risus sardonicus,' as the old writerscalled it, what conclusion would it suggest to your mind?""Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid," I answered,--"somestrychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus.""That was the idea which occurred to me the instant I saw the drawnmuscles of the face. On getting into the room I at once looked forthe means by which the poison had entered the system. As you saw, Idiscovered a thorn which had been driven or shot with no great forceinto the scalp. You observe that the part struck was that which wouldbe turned towards the hole in the ceiling if the man were erect inhis chair. Now examine the thorn."I took it up gingerly and held it in the light of the lantern. It waslong, sharp, and black, with a glazed look near the point as thoughsome gummy substance had dried upon it. The blunt end had beentrimmed and rounded off with a knife."Is that an English thorn?" he asked."No, it certainly is not.""With all these data you should be able to draw some just inference.But here are the regulars: so the auxiliary forces may beat aretreat."As he spoke, the steps which had been coming nearer sounded loudly onthe passage, and a very stout, portly man in a gray suit strodeheavily into the room. He was red-faced, burly and plethoric, with apair of very small twinkling eyes which looked keenly out frombetween swollen and puffy pouches. He was closely followed by aninspector in uniform, and by the still palpitating Thaddeus Sholto."Here's a business!" he cried, in a muffled, husky voice. "Here's apretty business! But who are all these? Why, the house seems to be asfull as a rabbit-warren!""I think you must recollect me, Mr. Athelney Jones," said Holmes,quietly."Why, of course I do!" he wheezed. "It's Mr. Sherlock Holmes, thetheorist. Remember you! I'll never forget how you lectured us all oncauses and inferences and effects in the Bishopgate jewel case. It'strue you set us on the right track; but you'll own now that it wasmore by good luck than good guidance.""It was a piece of very simple reasoning.""Oh, come, now, come! Never be ashamed to own up. But what is allthis? Bad business! Bad business! Stern facts here,--no room fortheories. How lucky that I happened to be out at Norwood over anothercase! I was at the station when the message arrived. What d'you thinkthe man died of?""Oh, this is hardly a case for me to theorize over," said Holmes,dryly."No, no. Still, we can't deny that you hit the nail on the headsometimes. Dear me! Door locked, I understand. Jewels worth half amillion missing. How was the window?""Fastened; but there are steps on the sill.""Well, well, if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to dowith the matter. That's common sense. Man might have died in a fit;but then the jewels are missing. Ha! I have a theory. These flashescome upon me at times.--Just step outside, sergeant, and you, Mr.Sholto. Your friend can remain.--What do you think of this, Holmes?Sholto was, on his own confession, with his brother last night. Thebrother died in a fit, on which Sholto walked off with the treasure.How's that?""On which the dead man very considerately got up and locked the dooron the inside.""Hum! There's a flaw there. Let us apply common sense to the matter.This Thaddeus Sholto was with his brother; there was a quarrel; somuch we know. The brother is dead and the jewels are gone. So muchalso we know. No one saw the brother from the time Thaddeus left him.His bed had not been slept in. Thaddeus is evidently in a mostdisturbed state of mind. His appearance is--well, not attractive. Yousee that I am weaving my web round Thaddeus. The net begins to closeupon him.""You are not quite in possession of the facts yet," said Holmes."This splinter of wood, which I have every reason to believe to bepoisoned, was in the man's scalp where you still see the mark; thiscard, inscribed as you see it, was on the table; and beside it laythis rather curious stone-headed instrument. How does all that fitinto your theory?""Confirms it in every respect," said the fat detective, pompously."House is full of Indian curiosities. Thaddeus brought this up, andif this splinter be poisonous Thaddeus may as well have mademurderous use of it as any other man. The card is somehocus-pocus,--a blind, as like as not. The only question is, how didhe depart? Ah, of course, here is a hole in the roof." With greatactivity, considering his bulk, he sprang up the steps and squeezedthrough into the garret, and immediately afterwards we heard hisexulting voice proclaiming that he had found the trap-door."He can find something," remarked Holmes, shrugging his shoulders."He has occasional glimmerings of reason. Il n'y a pas des sots siincommodes que ceux qui ont de l'esprit!""You see!" said Athelney Jones, reappearing down the steps again."Facts are better than mere theories, after all. My view of the caseis confirmed. There is a trap-door communicating with the roof, andit is partly open.""It was I who opened it.""Oh, indeed! You did notice it, then?" He seemed a little crestfallenat the discovery. "Well, whoever noticed it, it shows how ourgentleman got away. Inspector!""Yes, sir," from the passage."Ask Mr. Sholto to step this way.--Mr. Sholto, it is my duty toinform you that anything which you may say will be used against you.I arrest you in the Queen's name as being concerned in the death ofyour brother.""There, now! Didn't I tell you!" cried the poor little man, throwingout his hands, and looking from one to the other of us."Don't trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes. "I thinkthat I can engage to clear you of the charge.""Don't promise too much, Mr. Theorist,--don't promise too much!"snapped the detective. "You may find it a harder matter than youthink.""Not only will I clear him, Mr. Jones, but I will make you a freepresent of the name and description of one of the two people who werein this room last night. His name, I have every reason to believe, isJonathan Small. He is a poorly-educated man, small, active, with hisright leg off, and wearing a wooden stump which is worn away upon theinner side. His left boot has a coarse, square-toed sole, with aniron band round the heel. He is a middle-aged man, much sunburned,and has been a convict. These few indications may be of someassistance to you, coupled with the fact that there is a good deal ofskin missing from the palm of his hand. The other man--""Ah! the other man--?" asked Athelney Jones, in a sneering voice, butimpressed none the less, as I could easily see, by the precision ofthe other's manner."Is a rather curious person," said Sherlock Holmes, turning upon hisheel. "I hope before very long to be able to introduce you to thepair of them. A word with you, Watson."He led me out to the head of the stair. "This unexpected occurrence,"he said, "has caused us rather to lose sight of the original purposeof our journey.""I have just been thinking so," I answered. "It is not right thatMiss Morstan should remain in this stricken house.""No. You must escort her home. She lives with Mrs. Cecil Forrester,in Lower Camberwell: so it is not very far. I will wait for you hereif you will drive out again. Or perhaps you are too tired?""By no means. I don't think I could rest until I know more of thisfantastic business. I have seen something of the rough side of life,but I give you my word that this quick succession of strangesurprises to-night has shaken my nerve completely. I should like,however, to see the matter through with you, now that I have got sofar.""Your presence will be of great service to me," he answered. "Weshall work the case out independently, and leave this fellow Jones toexult over any mare's-nest which he may choose to construct. When youhave dropped Miss Morstan I wish you to go on to No. 3 Pinchin Lane,down near the water's edge at Lambeth. The third house on theright-hand side is a bird-stuffer's: Sherman is the name. You willsee a weasel holding a young rabbit in the window. Knock old Shermanup, and tell him, with my compliments, that I want Toby at once. Youwill bring Toby back in the cab with you.""A dog, I suppose.""Yes,--a queer mongrel, with a most amazing power of scent. I wouldrather have Toby's help than that of the whole detective force ofLondon.""I shall bring him, then," said I. "It is one now. I ought to be backbefore three, if I can get a fresh horse.""And I," said Holmes, "shall see what I can learn from Mrs.Bernstone, and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tell me,sleeps in the next garret. Then I shall study the great Jones'smethods and listen to his not too delicate sarcasms. 'Wir sindgewohnt, daß die Menschen verhöhnen was sie nicht verstehen.' Goetheis always pithy." CHAPTER VII The Episode of the BarrelThe police had brought a cab with them, and in this I escorted MissMorstan back to her home. After the angelic fashion of women, she hadborne trouble with a calm face as long as there was some one weakerthan herself to support, and I had found her bright and placid by theside of the frightened housekeeper. In the cab, however, she firstturned faint, and then burst into a passion of weeping,--so sorelyhad she been tried by the adventures of the night. She has told mesince that she thought me cold and distant upon that journey. Shelittle guessed the struggle within my breast, or the effort ofself-restraint which held me back. My sympathies and my love went outto her, even as my hand had in the garden. I felt that years of theconventionalities of life could not teach me to know her sweet, bravenature as had this one day of strange experiences. Yet there were twothoughts which sealed the words of affection upon my lips. She wasweak and helpless, shaken in mind and nerve. It was to take her at adisadvantage to obtrude love upon her at such a time. Worse still,she was rich. If Holmes's researches were successful, she would be anheiress. Was it fair, was it honorable, that a half-pay surgeonshould take such advantage of an intimacy which chance had broughtabout? Might she not look upon me as a mere vulgar fortune-seeker? Icould not bear to risk that such a thought should cross her mind.This Agra treasure intervened like an impassable barrier between us.It was nearly two o'clock when we reached Mrs. Cecil Forrester's. Theservants had retired hours ago, but Mrs. Forrester had been sointerested by the strange message which Miss Morstan had receivedthat she had sat up in the hope of her return. She opened the doorherself, a middle-aged, graceful woman, and it gave me joy to see howtenderly her arm stole round the other's waist and how motherly wasthe voice in which she greeted her. She was clearly no mere paiddependant, but an honored friend. I was introduced, and Mrs.Forrester earnestly begged me to step in and tell her our adventures.I explained, however, the importance of my errand, and promisedfaithfully to call and report any progress which we might make withthe case. As we drove away I stole a glance back, and I still seem tosee that little group on the step, the two graceful, clingingfigures, the half-opened door, the hall light shining through stainedglass, the barometer, and the bright stair-rods. It was soothing tocatch even that passing glimpse of a tranquil English home in themidst of the wild, dark business which had absorbed us.And the more I thought of what had happened, the wilder and darker itgrew. I reviewed the whole extraordinary sequence of events as Irattled on through the silent gas-lit streets. There was the originalproblem: that at least was pretty clear now. The death of CaptainMorstan, the sending of the pearls, the advertisement, theletter,--we had had light upon all those events. They had only ledus, however, to a deeper and far more tragic mystery. The Indiantreasure, the curious plan found among Morstan's baggage, the strangescene at Major Sholto's death, the rediscovery of the treasureimmediately followed by the murder of the discoverer, the verysingular accompaniments to the crime, the footsteps, the remarkableweapons, the words upon the card, corresponding with those uponCaptain Morstan's chart,--here was indeed a labyrinth in which a manless singularly endowed than my fellow-lodger might well despair ofever finding the clue.Pinchin Lane was a row of shabby two-storied brick houses in thelower quarter of Lambeth. I had to knock for some time at No. 3before I could make my impression. At last, however, there was theglint of a candle behind the blind, and a face looked out at theupper window."Go on, you drunken vagabone," said the face. "If you kick up anymore row I'll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs uponyou.""If you'll let one out it's just what I have come for," said I."Go on!" yelled the voice. "So help me gracious, I have a wiper inthe bag, an' I'll drop it on your 'ead if you don't hook it.""But I want a dog," I cried."I won't be argued with!" shouted Mr. Sherman. "Now stand clear, forwhen I say 'three,' down goes the wiper.""Mr. Sherlock Holmes--" I began, but the words had a most magicaleffect, for the window instantly slammed down, and within a minutethe door was unbarred and open. Mr. Sherman was a lanky, lean oldman, with stooping shoulders, a stringy neck, and blue-tintedglasses."A friend of Mr. Sherlock is always welcome," said he."Step in,sir. Keep clear of the badger; for he bites. Ah, naughty, naughty,would you take a nip at the gentleman?" This to a stoat which thrustits wicked head and red eyes between the bars of its cage. "Don'tmind that, sir: it's only a slow-worm. It hain't got no fangs, so Igives it the run o' the room, for it keeps the bettles down. You mustnot mind my bein' just a little short wi' you at first, for I'm guyedat by the children, and there's many a one just comes down this laneto knock me up. What was it that Mr. Sherlock Holmes wanted, sir?""He wanted a dog of yours.""Ah! that would be Toby.""Yes, Toby was the name.""Toby lives at No. 7 on the left here." He moved slowly forward withhis candle among the queer animal family which he had gathered roundhim. In the uncertain, shadowy light I could see dimly that therewere glancing, glimmering eyes peeping down at us from every crannyand corner. Even the rafters above our heads were lined by solemnfowls, who lazily shifted their weight from one leg to the other asour voices disturbed their slumbers.Toby proved to an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half spanieland half lurcher, brown-and-white in color, with a very clumsywaddling gait. It accepted after some hesitation a lump of sugarwhich the old naturalist handed to me, and, having thus sealed analliance, it followed me to the cab, and made no difficulties aboutaccompanying me. It had just struck three on the Palace clock when Ifound myself back once more at Pondicherry Lodge. Theex-prize-fighter McMurdo had, I found, been arrested as an accessory,and both he and Mr. Sholto had been marched off to the station. Twoconstables guarded the narrow gate, but they allowed me to pass withthe dog on my mentioning the detective's name.Holmes was standing on the door-step, with his hands in his pockets,smoking his pipe."Ah, you have him there!" said he. "Good dog, then! Athelney Joneshas gone. We have had an immense display of energy since you left. Hehas arrested not only friend Thaddeus, but the gatekeeper, thehousekeeper, and the Indian servant. We have the place to ourselves,but for a sergeant up-stairs. Leave the dog here, and come up."We tied Toby to the hall table, and reascended the stairs. The roomwas as we had left it, save that a sheet had been draped over thecentral figure. A weary-looking police-sergeant reclined in thecorner."Lend me your bull's-eye, sergeant," said my companion. "Now tie thisbit of card round my neck, so as to hang it in front of me. Thankyou. Now I must kick off my boots and stockings.--Just you carry themdown with you, Watson. I am going to do a little climbing. And dip myhandkerchief into the creasote. That will do. Now come up into thegarret with me for a moment."We clambered up through the hole. Holmes turned his light once moreupon the footsteps in the dust."I wish you particularly to notice these footmarks," he said. "Do youobserve anything noteworthy about them?""They belong," I said, "to a child or a small woman.""Apart from their size, though. Is there nothing else?""They appear to be much as other footmarks.""Not at all. Look here! This is the print of a right foot in thedust. Now I make one with my naked foot beside it. What is the chiefdifference?""Your toes are all cramped together. The other print has each toedistinctly divided.""Quite so. That is the point. Bear that in mind. Now, would youkindly step over to that flap-window and smell the edge of thewood-work? I shall stay here, as I have this handkerchief in myhand."I did as he directed, and was instantly conscious of a strong tarrysmell."That is where he put his foot in getting out. If you can trace him,I should think that Toby will have no difficulty. Now rundown-stairs, loose the dog, and look out for Blondin."By the time that I got out into the grounds Sherlock Holmes was onthe roof, and I could see him like an enormous glow-worm crawlingvery slowly along the ridge. I lost sight of him behind a stack ofchimneys, but he presently reappeared, and then vanished once moreupon the opposite side. When I made my way round there I found himseated at one of the corner eaves."That You, Watson?" he cried."Yes.""This is the place. What is that black thing down there?""A water-barrel.""Top on it?""Yes.""No sign of a ladder?""No.""Confound the fellow! It's a most break-neck place. I ought to beable to come down where he could climb up. The water-pipe feelspretty firm. Here goes, anyhow."There was a scuffling of feet, and the lantern began to come steadilydown the side of the wall. Then with a light spring he came on to thebarrel, and from there to the earth."It was easy to follow him," he said, drawing on his stockings andboots. "Tiles were loosened the whole way along, and in his hurry hehad dropped this. It confirms my diagnosis, as you doctors expressit."The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch wovenout of colored grasses and with a few tawdry beads strung round it.In shape and size it was not unlike a cigarette-case. Inside werehalf a dozen spines of dark wood, sharp at one end and rounded at theother, like that which had struck Bartholomew Sholto."They are hellish things," said he. "Look out that you don't prickyourself. I'm delighted to have them, for the chances are that theyare all he has. There is the less fear of you or me finding one inour skin before long. I would sooner face a Martini bullet, myself.Are you game for a six-mile trudge, Watson?""Certainly," I answered."Your leg will stand it?""Oh, yes.""Here you are, doggy! Good old Toby! Smell it, Toby, smell it!" Hepushed the creasote handkerchief under the dog's nose, while thecreature stood with its fluffy legs separated, and with a mostcomical cock to its head, like a connoisseur sniffing the bouquet ofa famous vintage. Holmes then threw the handkerchief to a distance,fastened a stout cord to the mongrel's collar, and let him to thefoot of the water-barrel. The creature instantly broke into asuccession of high, tremulous yelps, and, with his nose on theground, and his tail in the air, pattered off upon the trail at apace which strained his leash and kept us at the top of our speed.The east had been gradually whitening, and we could now see somedistance in the cold gray light. The square, massive house, with itsblack, empty windows and high, bare walls, towered up, sad andforlorn, behind us. Our course let right across the grounds, in andout among the trenches and pits with which they were scarred andintersected. The whole place, with its scattered dirt-heaps andill-grown shrubs, had a blighted, ill-omened look which harmonizedwith the black tragedy which hung over it.On reaching the boundary wall Toby ran along, whining eagerly,underneath its shadow, and stopped finally in a corner screened by ayoung beech. Where the two walls joined, several bricks had beenloosened, and the crevices left were worn down and rounded upon thelower side, as though they had frequently been used as a ladder.Holmes clambered up, and, taking the dog from me, he dropped it overupon the other side."There's the print of wooden-leg's hand," he remarked, as I mountedup beside him. "You see the slight smudge of blood upon the whiteplaster. What a lucky thing it is that we have had no very heavy rainsince yesterday! The scent will lie upon the road in spite of theireight-and-twenty hours' start."I confess that I had my doubts myself when I reflected upon the greattraffic which had passed along the London road in the interval. Myfears were soon appeased, however. Toby never hesitated or swerved,but waddled on in his peculiar rolling fashion. Clearly, the pungentsmell of the creasote rose high above all other contending scents."Do not imagine," said Holmes, "that I depend for my success in thiscase upon the mere chance of one of these fellows having put his footin the chemical. I have knowledge now which would enable me to tracethem in many different ways. This, however, is the readiest and,since fortune has put it into our hands, I should be culpable if Ineglected it. It has, however, prevented the case from becoming thepretty little intellectual problem which it at one time promised tobe. There might have been some credit to be gained out of it, but forthis too palpable clue.""There is credit, and to spare," said I. "I assure you, Holmes, thatI marvel at the means by which you obtain your results in this case,even more than I did in the Jefferson Hope Murder. The thing seems tome to be deeper and more inexplicable. How, for example, could youdescribe with such confidence the wooden-legged man?""Pshaw, my dear boy! it was simplicity itself. I don't wish to betheatrical. It is all patent and above-board. Two officers who are incommand of a convict-guard learn an important secret as to buriedtreasure. A map is drawn for them by an Englishman named JonathanSmall. You remember that we saw the name upon the chart in CaptainMorstan's possession. He had signed it in behalf of himself and hisassociates,--the sign of the four, as he somewhat dramatically calledit. Aided by this chart, the officers--or one of them--gets thetreasure and brings it to England, leaving, we will suppose, somecondition under which he received it unfulfilled. Now, then, why didnot Jonathan Small get the treasure himself? The answer is obvious.The chart is dated at a time when Morstan was brought into closeassociation with convicts. Jonathan Small did not get the treasurebecause he and his associates were themselves convicts and could notget away.""But that is mere speculation," said I."It is more than that. It is the only hypothesis which covers thefacts. Let us see how it fits in with the sequel. Major Sholtoremains at peace for some years, happy in the possession of histreasure. Then he receives a letter from India which gives him agreat fright. What was that?""A letter to say that the men whom he had wronged had been set free.""Or had escaped. That is much more likely, for he would have knownwhat their term of imprisonment was. It would not have been asurprise to him. What does he do then? He guards himself against awooden-legged man,--a white man, mark you, for he mistakes a whitetradesman for him, and actually fires a pistol at him. Now, only onewhite man's name is on the chart. The others are Hindoos orMohammedans. There is no other white man. Therefore we may say withconfidence that the wooden-legged man is identical with JonathanSmall. Does the reasoning strike yo as being faulty?""No: it is clear and concise.""Well, now, let us put ourselves in the place of Jonathan Small. Letus look at it from his point of view. He comes to England with thedouble idea of regaining what he would consider to be his rights andof having his revenge upon the man who had wronged him. He found outwhere Sholto lived, and very possibly he established communicationswith some one inside the house. There is this butler, Lal Rao, whomwe have not seen. Mrs. Bernstone gives him far from a good character.Small could not find out, however, where the treasure was hid, for noone ever knew, save the major and one faithful servant who had died.Suddenly Small learns that the major is on his death-bed. In a frenzylest the secret of the treasure die with him, he runs the gauntlet ofthe guards, makes his way to the dying man's window, and is onlydeterred from entering by the presence of his two sons. Mad withhate, however, against the dead man, he enters the room that night,searches his private papers in the hope of discovering somememorandum relating to the treasure, and finally leaves a memento ofhis visit in the short inscription upon the card. He had doubtlessplanned beforehand that should he slay the major he would leave somesuch record upon the body as a sign that it was not a common murder,but, from the point of view of the four associates, something in thenature of an act of justice. Whimsical and bizarre conceits of thiskind are common enough in the annals of crime, and usually affordvaluable indications as to the criminal. Do you follow all this?""Very clearly.""Now, what could Jonathan Small do? He could only continue to keep asecret watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure. Possibly heleaves England and only comes back at intervals. Then comes thediscovery of the garret, and he is instantly informed of it. We againtrace the presence of some confederate in the household. Jonathan,with his wooden leg, is utterly unable to reach the lofty room ofBartholomew Sholto. He takes with him, however, a rather curiousassociate, who gets over this difficulty, but dips his naked footinto creasote, whence come Toby, and a six-mile limp for a half-payofficer with a damaged tendo Achillis.""But it was the associate, and not Jonathan, who committed thecrime.""Quite so. And rather to Jonathan's disgust, to judge by the way thestamped about when he got into the room. He bore no grudge againstBartholomew Sholto, and would have preferred if he could have beensimply bound and gagged. He did not wish to put his head in a halter.There was no help for it, however: the savage instincts of hiscompanion had broken out, and the poison had done its work: soJonathan Small left his record, lowered the treasure-box to theground, and followed it himself. That was the train of events as faras I can decipher them. Of course as to his personal appearance hemust be middle-aged, and must be sunburned after serving his time insuch an oven as the Andamans. His height is readily calculated fromthe length of his stride, and we know that he was bearded. Hishairiness was the one point which impressed itself upon ThaddeusSholto when he saw him at the window. I don't know that there isanything else.""The associate?""Ah, well, there is no great mystery in that. But you will know allabout it soon enough. How sweet the morning air is! See how that onelittle cloud floats like a pink feather from some gigantic flamingo.Now the red rim of the sun pushes itself over the London cloud-bank.It shines on a good many folk, but on none, I dare bet, who are on astranger errand than you and I. How small we feel with our pettyambitions and strivings in the presence of the great elemental forcesof nature! Are you well up in your Jean Paul?""Fairly so. I worked back to him through Carlyle.""That was like following the brook to the parent lake. He makes onecurious but profound remark. It is that the chief proof of man's realgreatness lies in his perception of his own smallness. It argues, yousee, a power of comparison and of appreciation which is in itself aproof of nobility. There is much food for thought in Richter. Youhave not a pistol, have you?""I have my stick.""It is just possible that we may need something of the sort if we getto their lair. Jonathan I shall leave to you, but if the other turnsnasty I shall shoot him dead." He took out his revolver as he spoke,and, having loaded two of the chambers, he put it back into theright-hand pocket of his jacket.We had during this time been following the guidance of Toby down thehalf-rural villa-lined roads which lead to the metropolis. Now,however, we were beginning to come among continuous streets, wherelaborers and dockmen were already astir, and slatternly women weretaking down shutters and brushing door-steps. At the square-toppedcorner public houses business was just beginning, and rough-lookingmen were emerging, rubbing their sleeves across their beards aftertheir morning wet. Strange dogs sauntered up and stared wonderinglyat us as we passed, but our inimitable Toby looked neither to theright nor to the left, but trotted onwards with his nose to theground and an occasional eager whine which spoke of a hot scent.We had traversed Streatham, Brixton, Camberwell, and now foundourselves in Kennington Lane, having borne away through theside-streets to the east of the Oval. The men whom we pursued seemedto have taken a curiously zigzag road, with the idea probably ofescaping observation. They had never kept to the main road if aparallel side-street would serve their turn. At the foot ofKennington Lane they had edged away to the left through Bond Streetand Miles Street. Where the latter street turns into Knight's Place,Toby ceased to advance, but began to run backwards and forwards withone ear cocked and the other drooping, the very picture of canineindecision. Then he waddled round in circles, looking up to us fromtime to time, as if to ask for sympathy in his embarrassment."What the deuce is the matter with the dog?" growled Holmes. "Theysurely would not take a cab, or go off in a balloon.""Perhaps they stood here for some time," I suggested."Ah! it's all right. He's off again," said my companion, in a tone ofrelief.He was indeed off, for after sniffing round again he suddenly made uphis mind, and darted away with an energy and determination such as hehad not yet shown. The scent appeared to be much hotter than before,for he had not even to put his nose on the ground, but tugged at hisleash and tried to break into a run. I cold see by the gleam inHolmes's eyes that he thought we were nearing the end of our journey.Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick andNelson's large timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern. Herethe dog, frantic with excitement, turned down through the side-gateinto the enclosure, where the sawyers were already at work. On thedog raced through sawdust and shavings, down an alley, round apassage, between two wood-piles, and finally, with a triumphant yelp,sprang upon a large barrel which still stood upon the hand-trolley onwhich it had been brought. With lolling tongue and blinking eyes,Toby stood upon the cask, looking from one to the other of us forsome sign of appreciation. The staves of the barrel and the wheels ofthe trolley were smeared with a dark liquid, and the whole air washeavy with the smell of creasote.Sherlock Holmes and I looked blankly at each other, and then burstsimultaneously into an uncontrollable fit of laughter. CHAPTER VIII The Baker Street Irregulars"What now?" I asked. "Toby has lost his character for infallibility.""He acted according to his lights," said Holmes, lifting him downfrom the barrel and walking him out of the timber-yard. "If youconsider how much creasote is carted about London in one day, it isno great wonder that our trail should have been crossed. It is muchused now, especially for the seasoning of wood. Poor Toby is not toblame.""We must get on the main scent again, I suppose.""Yes. And, fortunately, we have no distance to go. Evidently whatpuzzled the dog at the corner of Knight's Place was that there weretwo different trails running in opposite directions. We took thewrong one. It only remains to follow the other."There was no difficulty about this. On leading Toby to the placewhere he had committed his fault, he cast about in a wide circle andfinally dashed off in a fresh direction."We must take care that he does not now bring us to the place wherethe creasote-barrel came from," I observed."I had thought of that. But you notice that he keeps on the pavement,whereas the barrel passed down the roadway. No, we are on the truescent now."It tended down towards the river-side, running through Belmont Placeand Prince's Street. At the end of Broad Street it ran right down tothe water's edge, where there was a small wooden wharf. Toby led usto the very edge of this, and there stood whining, looking out on thedark current beyond."We are out of luck," said Holmes. "They have taken to a boat here."Several small punts and skiffs were lying about in the water and onthe edge of the wharf. We took Toby round to each in turn, but,though he sniffed earnestly, he made no sign.Close to the rude landing-stage was a small brick house, with awooden placard slung out through the second window. "Mordecai Smith"was printed across it in large letters, and, underneath, "Boats tohire by the hour or day." A second inscription above the doorinformed us that a steam launch was kept,--a statement which wasconfirmed by a great pile of coke upon the jetty. Sherlock Holmeslooked slowly round, and his face assumed an ominous expression."This looks bad," said he. "These fellows are sharper than Iexpected. They seem to have covered their tracks. There has, I fear,been preconcerted management here."He was approaching the door of the house, when it opened, and alittle, curly-headed lad of six came running out, followed by astoutish, red-faced woman with a large sponge in her hand."You come back and be washed, Jack," she shouted. "Come back, youyoung imp; for if your father comes home and finds you like that,he'll let us hear of it.""Dear little chap!" said Holmes, strategically. "What a rosy-cheekedyoung rascal! Now, Jack, is there anything you would like?"The youth pondered for a moment. "I'd like a shillin'," said he."Nothing you would like better?""I'd like two shillin' better," the prodigy answered, after somethought."Here you are, then! Catch!--A fine child, Mrs. Smith!""Lor' bless you, sir, he is that, and forward. He gets a'most toomuch for me to manage, 'specially when my man is away days at atime.""Away, is he?" said Holmes, in a disappointed voice. "I am sorry forthat, for I wanted to speak to Mr. Smith.""He's been away since yesterday mornin', sir, and, truth to tell, Iam beginnin' to feel frightened about him. But if it was about aboat, sir, maybe I could serve as well.""I wanted to hire his steam launch.""Why, bless you, sir, it is in the steam launch that he has gone.That's what puzzles me; for I know there ain't more coals in her thanwould take her to about Woolwich and back. If he'd been away in thebarge I'd ha' thought nothin'; for many a time a job has taken him asfar as Gravesend, and then if there was much doin' there he might ha'stayed over. But what good is a steam launch without coals?""He might have bought some at a wharf down the river.""He might, sir, but it weren't his way. Many a time I've heard himcall out at the prices they charge for a few odd bags. Besides, Idon't like that wooden-legged man, wi' his ugly face and outlandishtalk. What did he want always knockin' about here for?""A wooden-legged man?" said Holmes, with bland surprise."Yes, sir, a brown, monkey-faced chap that's called more'n once formy old man. It was him that roused him up yesternight, and, what'smore, my man knew he was comin', for he had steam up in the launch. Itell you straight, sir, I don't feel easy in my mind about it.""But, my dear Mrs. Smith," said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders, "Youare frightening yourself about nothing. How could you possibly tellthat it was the wooden-legged man who came in the night? I don'tquite understand how you can be so sure.""His voice, sir. I knew his voice, which is kind o' thick and foggy.He tapped at the winder,--about three it would be. 'Show a leg,matey,' says he: 'time to turn out guard.' My old man woke upJim,--that's my eldest,--and away they went, without so much as aword to me. I could hear the wooden leg clackin' on the stones.""And was this wooden-legged man alone?""Couldn't say, I am sure, sir. I didn't hear no one else.""I am sorry, Mrs. Smith, for I wanted a steam launch, and I haveheard good reports of the--Let me see, what is her name?""The Aurora, sir.""Ah! She's not that old green launch with a yellow line, very broadin the beam?""No, indeed. She's as trim a little thing as any on the river. She'sbeen fresh painted, black with two red streaks.""Thanks. I hope that you will hear soon from Mr. Smith. I am goingdown the river; and if I should see anything of the Aurora I shalllet him know that you are uneasy. A black funnel, you say?""No, sir. Black with a white band.""Ah, of course. It was the sides which were black. Good-morning, Mrs.Smith.--There is a boatman here with a wherry, Watson. We shall takeit and cross the river."The main thing with people of that sort," said Holmes, as we sat inthe sheets of the wherry, "is never to let them think that theirinformation can be of the slightest importance to you. If you do,they will instantly shut up like an oyster. If you listen to themunder protest, as it were, you are very likely to get what you want.""Our course now seems pretty clear," said I."What would you do, then?""I would engage a launch and go down the river on the track of theAurora.""My dear fellow, it would be a colossal task. She may have touched atany wharf on either side of the stream between here and Greenwich.Below the bridge there is a perfect labyrinth of landing-places formiles. It would take you days and days to exhaust them, if you setabout it alone.""Employ the police, then.""No. I shall probably call Athelney Jones in at the last moment. Heis not a bad fellow, and I should not like to do anything which wouldinjure him professionally. But I have a fancy for working it outmyself, now that we have gone so far.""Could we advertise, then, asking for information from wharfingers?""Worse and worse! Our men would know that the chase was hot at theirheels, and they would be off out of the country. As it is, they arelikely enough to leave, but as long as they think they are perfectlysafe they will be in no hurry. Jones's energy will be of use to usthere, for his view of the case is sure to push itself into the dailypress, and the runaways will think that every one is off on the wrongscent.""What are we to do, then?" I asked, as we landed near MillbankPenitentiary."Take this hansom, drive home, have some breakfast, and get an hour'ssleep. It is quite on the cards that we may be afoot to-night again.Stop at a telegraph-office, cabby! We will keep Toby, for he may beof use to us yet."We pulled up at the Great Peter Street post-office, and Holmesdespatched his wire. "Whom do you think that is to?" he asked, as weresumed our journey."I am sure I don't know.""You remember the Baker Street division of the detective police forcewhom I employed in the Jefferson Hope case?""Well," said I, laughing."This is just the case where they might be invaluable. If they fail,I have other resources; but I shall try them first. That wire was tomy dirty little lieutenant, Wiggins, and I expect that he and hisgang will be with us before we have finished our breakfast."It was between eight and nine o'clock now, and I was conscious of astrong reaction after the successive excitements of the night. I waslimp and weary, befogged in mind and fatigued in body. I had not theprofessional enthusiasm which carried my companion on, nor could Ilook at the matter as a mere abstract intellectual problem. As far asthe death of Bartholomew Sholto went, I had heard little good of him,and could feel no intense antipathy to his murderers. The treasure,however, was a different matter. That, or part of it, belongedrightfully to Miss Morstan. While there was a chance of recovering itI was ready to devote my life to the one object. True, if I found itit would probably put her forever beyond my reach. Yet it would be apetty and selfish love which would be influenced by such a thought asthat. If Holmes could work to find the criminals, I had a tenfoldstronger reason to urge me on to find the treasure.A bath at Baker Street and a complete change freshened me upwonderfully. When I came down to our room I found the breakfast laidand Holmes pouring out the coffee."Here it is," said he, laughing, and pointing to an open newspaper."The energetic Jones and the ubiquitous reporter have fixed it upbetween them. But you have had enough of the case. Better have yourham and eggs first."I took the paper from him and read the short notice, which was headed"Mysterious Business at Upper Norwood.""About twelve o'clock last night," said the Standard, "Mr.Bartholomew Sholto, of Pondicherry Lodge, Upper Norwood, was founddead in his room under circumstances which point to foul play. As faras we can learn, no actual traces of violence were found upon Mr.Sholto's person, but a valuable collection of Indian gems which thedeceased gentleman had inherited from his father has been carriedoff. The discovery was first made by Mr. Sherlock Holmes and Dr.Watson, who had called at the house with Mr. Thaddeus Sholto, brotherof the deceased. By a singular piece of good fortune, Mr. AthelneyJones, the well-known member of the detective police force, happenedto be at the Norwood Police Station, and was on the ground withinhalf an hour of the first alarm. His trained and experiencedfaculties were at once directed towards the detection of thecriminals, with the gratifying result that the brother, ThaddeusSholto, has already been arrested, together with the housekeeper,Mrs. Bernstone, an Indian butler named Lal Rao, and a porter, orgatekeeper, named McMurdo. It is quite certain that the thief orthieves were well acquainted with the house, for Mr. Jones'swell-known technical knowledge and his powers of minute observationhave enabled him to prove conclusively that the miscreants could nothave entered by the door or by the window, but must have made theirway across the roof of the building, and so through a trap-door intoa room which communicated with that in which the body was found. Thisfact, which has been very clearly made out, proves conclusively thatit was no mere haphazard burglary. The prompt and energetic action ofthe officers of the law shows the great advantage of the presence onsuch occasions of a single vigorous and masterful mind. We cannot butthink that it supplies an argument to those who would wish to see ourdetectives more decentralized, and so brought into closer and moreeffective touch with the cases which it is their duty toinvestigate.""Isn't it gorgeous!" said Holmes, grinning over his coffee-cup. "Whatdo you think of it?""I think that we have had a close shave ourselves of being arrestedfor the crime.""So do I. I wouldn't answer for our safety now, if he should happento have another of his attacks of energy."At this moment there was a loud ring at the bell, and I could hearMrs. Hudson, our landlady, raising her voice in a wail ofexpostulation and dismay."By heaven, Holmes," I said, half rising, "I believe that they arereally after us.""No, it's not quite so bad as that. It is the unofficial force,--theBaker Street irregulars."As he spoke, there came a swift pattering of naked feet upon thestairs, a clatter of high voices, and in rushed a dozen dirty andragged little street-Arabs. There was some show of discipline amongthem, despite their tumultuous entry, for they instantly drew up inline and stood facing us with expectant faces. One of their number,taller and older than the others, stood forward with an air oflounging superiority which was very funny in such a disreputablelittle carecrow."Got your message, sir," said he, "and brought 'em on sharp. Threebob and a tanner for tickets.""Here you are," said Holmes, producing some silver. "In future theycan report to you, Wiggins, and you to me. I cannot have the houseinvaded in this way. However, it is just as well that you should allhear the instructions. I want to find the whereabouts of a steamlaunch called the Aurora, owner Mordecai Smith, black with two redstreaks, funnel black with a white band. She is down the riversomewhere. I want one boy to be at Mordecai Smith's landing-stageopposite Millbank to say if the boat comes back. You must divide itout among yourselves, and do both banks thoroughly. Let me know themoment you have news. Is that all clear?""Yes, guv'nor," said Wiggins."The old scale of pay, and a guinea to the boy who finds the boat.Here's a day in advance. Now off you go!" He handed them a shillingeach, and away they buzzed down the stairs, and I saw them a momentlater streaming down the street."If the launch is above water they will find her," said Holmes, as herose from the table and lit his pipe. "They can go everywhere, seeeverything, overhear every one. I expect to hear before evening thatthey have spotted her. In the mean while, we can do nothing but awaitresults. We cannot pick up the broken trail until we find either theAurora or Mr. Mordecai Smith.""Toby could eat these scraps, I dare say. Are you going to bed,Holmes?""No: I am not tired. I have a curious constitution. I never rememberfeeling tired by work, though idleness exhausts me completely. I amgoing to smoke and to think over this queer business to which my fairclient has introduced us. If ever man had an easy task, this of oursought to be. Wooden-legged men are not so common, but the other manmust, I should think, be absolutely unique.""That other man again!""I have no wish to make a mystery of him,--to you, anyway. But youmust have formed your own opinion. Now, do consider the data.Diminutive footmarks, toes never fettered by boots, naked feet,stone-headed wooden mace, great agility, small poisoned darts. Whatdo you make of all this?""A savage!" I exclaimed. "Perhaps one of those Indians who were theassociates of Jonathan Small.""Hardly that," said he. "When first I saw signs of strange weapons Iwas inclined to think so; but the remarkable character of thefootmarks caused me to reconsider my views. Some of the inhabitantsof the Indian Peninsula are small men, but none could have left suchmarks as that. The Hindoo proper has long and thin feet. Thesandal-wearing Mohammedan has the great toe well separated from theothers, because the thong is commonly passed between. These littledarts, too, could only be shot in one way. They are from a blow-pipe.Now, then, where are we to find our savage?""South American," I hazarded.He stretched his hand up, and took down a bulky volume from theshelf. "This is the first volume of a gazetteer which is now beingpublished. It may be looked upon as the very latest authority. Whathave we here? 'Andaman Islands, situated 340 miles to the north ofSumatra, in the Bay of Bengal.' Hum! hum!What's all this? Moistclimate, coral reefs, sharks, Port Blair, convict-barracks, RutlandIsland, cottonwoods--Ah, here we are. 'The aborigines of the AndamanIslands may perhaps claim the distinction of being the smallest raceupon this earth, though some anthropologists prefer the Bushmen ofAfrica, the Digger Indians of America, and the Terra del Fuegians.The average height is rather below four feet, although manyfull-grown adults may be found who are very much smaller than this.They are a fierce, morose, and intractable people, though capable offorming most devoted friendships when their confidence has once beengained.' Mark that, Watson. Now, then, listen to this. 'They arenaturally hideous, having large, misshapen heads, small, fierce eyes,and distorted features. Their feet and hands, however, are remarkablysmall. So intractable and fierce are they that all the efforts of theBritish official have failed to win them over in any degree. Theyhave always been a terror to shipwrecked crews, braining thesurvivors with their stone-headed clubs, or shooting them with theirpoisoned arrows. These massacres are invariably concluded by acannibal feast.' Nice, amiable people, Watson! If this fellow hadbeen left to his own unaided devices this affair might have taken aneven more ghastly turn. I fancy that, even as it is, Jonathan Smallwould give a good deal not to have employed him.""But how came he to have so singular a companion?""Ah, that is more than I can tell. Since, however, we had alreadydetermined that Small had come from the Andamans, it is not so verywonderful that this islander should be with him. No doubt we shallknow all about it in time. Look here, Watson; you look regularlydone. Lie down there on the sofa, and see if I can put you to sleep."He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself outhe began to play some low, dreamy, melodious air,--his own, no doubt,for he had a remarkable gift for improvisation. I have a vagueremembrance of his gaunt limbs, his earnest face, and the rise andfall of his bow. Then I seemed to be floated peacefully away upon asoft sea of sound, until I found myself in dream-land, with the sweetface of Mary Morstan looking down upon me. CHAPTER IX A Break in the ChainIt was late in the afternoon before I woke, strengthened andrefreshed. Sherlock Holmes still sat exactly as I had left him, savethat he had laid aside his violin and was deep in a book. He lookedacross at me, as I stirred, and I noticed that his face was dark andtroubled."You have slept soundly," he said. "I feared that our talk would wakeyou.""I heard nothing," I answered. "Have you had fresh news, then?""Unfortunately, no. I confess that I am surprised and disappointed. Iexpected something definite by this time.Wiggins has just been upto report. He says that no trace can be found of the launch. It is aprovoking check, for every hour is of importance.""Can I do anything? I am perfectly fresh now, and quite ready foranother night's outing.""No, we can do nothing. We can only wait. If we go ourselves, themessage might come in our absence, and delay be caused. You can dowhat you will, but I must remain on guard.""Then I shall run over to Camberwell and call upon Mrs. CecilForrester. She asked me to, yesterday.""On Mrs. Cecil Forrester?" asked Holmes, with the twinkle of a smilein his eyes."Well, of course Miss Morstan too. They were anxious to hear whathappened.""I would not tell them too much," said Holmes. "Women are never to beentirely trusted,--not the best of them."I did not pause to argue over this atrocious sentiment. "I shall beback in an hour or two," I remarked."All right! Good luck! But, I say, if you are crossing the river youmay as well return Toby, for I don't think it is at all likely thatwe shall have any use for him now."I took our mongrel accordingly, and left him, together with ahalf-sovereign, at the old naturalist's in Pinchin Lane. AtCamberwell I found Miss Morstan a little weary after her night'sadventures, but very eager to hear the news. Mrs. Forrester, too, wasfull of curiosity. I told them all that we had done, suppressing,however, the more dreadful parts of the tragedy. Thus, although Ispoke of Mr. Sholto's death, I said nothing of the exact manner andmethod of it. With all my omissions, however, there was enough tostartle and amaze them."It is a romance!" cried Mrs. Forrester. "An injured lady, half amillion in treasure, a black cannibal, and a wooden-legged ruffian.They take the place of the conventional dragon or wicked earl.""And two knight-errants to the rescue," added Miss Morstan, with abright glance at me."Why, Mary, your fortune depends upon the issue of this search. Idon't think that you are nearly excited enough. Just imagine what itmust be to be so rich, and to have the world at your feet!"It sent a little thrill of joy to my heart to notice that she showedno sign of elation at the prospect. On the contrary, she gave a tossof her proud head, as though the matter were one in which she tooksmall interest."It is for Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious," she said. "Nothingelse is of any consequence; but I think that he has behaved mostkindly and honorably throughout. It is our duty to clear him of thisdreadful and unfounded charge."It was evening before I left Camberwell, and quite dark by the time Ireached home. My companion's book and pipe lay by his chair, but hehad disappeared. I looked about in the hope of seeing a note, butthere was none."I suppose that Mr. Sherlock Holmes has gone out," I said to Mrs. Hudson as she came up to lower the blinds."No, sir. He has gone to his room, sir. Do you know, sir," sinkingher voice into an impressive whisper, "I am afraid for his health?""Why so, Mrs. Hudson?""Well, he's that strange, sir. After you was gone he walked and hewalked, up and down, and up and down, until I was weary of the soundof his footstep. Then I heard him talking to himself and muttering,and every time the bell rang out he came on the stairhead, with 'Whatis that, Mrs. Hudson?' And now he has slammed off to his room, but Ican hear him walking away the same as ever. I hope he's not going tobe ill, sir. I ventured to say something to him about coolingmedicine, but he turned on me, sir, with such a look that I don'tknow how ever I got out of the room.""I don't think that you have any cause to be uneasy, Mrs. Hudson," Ianswered. "I have seen him like this before. He has some small matterupon his mind which makes him restless." I tried to speak lightly toour worthy landlady, but I was myself somewhat uneasy when throughthe long night I still from time to time heard the dull sound of histread, and knew how his keen spirit was chafing against thisinvoluntary inaction.At breakfast-time he looked worn and haggard, with a little fleck offeverish color upon either cheek."You are knocking yourself up, old man," I remarked. "I heard youmarching about in the night.""No, I could not sleep," he answered. "This infernal problem isconsuming me. It is too much to be balked by so petty an obstacle,when all else had been overcome. I know the men, the launch,everything; and yet I can get no news. I have set other agencies atwork, and used every means at my disposal. The whole river has beensearched on either side, but there is no news, nor has Mrs. Smithheard of her husband. I shall come to the conclusion soon that theyhave scuttled the craft. But there are objections to that.""Or that Mrs. Smith has put us on a wrong scent.""No, I think that may be dismissed. I had inquiries made, and thereis a launch of that description.""Could it have gone up the river?""I have considered that possibility too, and there is a search-partywho will work up as far as Richmond. If no news comes to-day, I shallstart off myself to-morrow, and go for the men rather than the boat.But surely, surely, we shall hear something."We did not, however. Not a word came to us either from Wiggins orfrom the other agencies. There were articles in most of the papersupon the Norwood tragedy. They all appeared to be rather hostile tothe unfortunate Thaddeus Sholto. No fresh details were to be found,however, in any of them, save that an inquest was to be held upon thefollowing day. I walked over to Camberwell in the evening to reportour ill success to the ladies, and on my return I found Holmesdejected and somewhat morose. He would hardly reply to my questions,and busied himself all evening in an abstruse chemical analysis whichinvolved much heating of retorts and distilling of vapors, ending atlast in a smell which fairly drove me out of the apartment. Up to thesmall hours of the morning I could hear the clinking of histest-tubes which told me that he was still engaged in his malodorousexperiment.In the early dawn I woke with a start, and was surprised to find himstanding by my bedside, clad in a rude sailor dress with apea-jacket, and a coarse red scarf round his neck."I am off down the river, Watson," said he. "I have been turning itover in my mind, and I can see only one way out of it. It is worthtrying, at all events.""Surely I can come with you, then?" said I."No; you can be much more useful if you will remain here as myrepresentative. I am loath to go, for it is quite on the cards thatsome message may come during the day, though Wiggins was despondentabout it last night. I want you to open all notes and telegrams, andto act on your own judgment if any news should come. Can I rely uponyou?""Most certainly.""I am afraid that you will not be able to wire to me, for I canhardly tell yet where I may find myself. If I am in luck, however, Imay not be gone so very long. I shall have news of some sort or otherbefore I get back."I had heard nothing of him by breakfast-time. On opening theStandard, however, I found that there was a fresh allusion to thebusiness."With reference to the Upper Norwood tragedy," it remarked, "we havereason to believe that the matter promises to be even more complexand mysterious than was originally supposed. Fresh evidence has shownthat it is quite impossible that Mr. Thaddeus Sholto could have beenin any way concerned in the matter. He and the housekeeper, Mrs.Bernstone, were both released yesterday evening. It is believed,however, that the police have a clue as to the real culprits, andthat it is being prosecuted by Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard,with all his well-known energy and sagacity. Further arrests may beexpected at any moment.""That is satisfactory so far as it goes," thought I. "Friend Sholtois safe, at any rate. I wonder what the fresh clue may be; though itseems to be a stereotyped form whenever the police have made ablunder."I tossed the paper down upon the table, but at that moment my eyecaught an advertisement in the agony column. It ran in this way:"Lost.--Whereas Mordecai Smith, boatman, and his son, Jim, leftSmith's Wharf at or about three o'clock last Tuesday morning in thesteam launch Aurora, black with two red stripes, funnel black with awhite band, the sum of five pounds will be paid to any one who cangive information to Mrs. Smith, at Smith's Wharf, or at 221b BakerStreet, as to the whereabouts of the said Mordecai Smith and thelaunch Aurora."This was clearly Holmes's doing. The Baker Street address was enoughto prove that. It struck me as rather ingenious, because it might beread by the fugitives without their seeing in it more than thenatural anxiety of a wife for her missing husband.It was a long day. Every time that a knock came to the door, or asharp step passed in the street, I imagined that it was either Holmesreturning or an answer to his advertisement. I tried to read, but mythoughts would wander off to our strange quest and to theill-assorted and villainous pair whom we were pursuing. Could therebe, I wondered, some radical flaw in my companion's reasoning. Mighthe be suffering from some huge self-deception? Was it not possiblethat his nimble and speculative mind had built up this wild theoryupon faulty premises? I had never known him to be wrong; and yet thekeenest reasoner may occasionally be deceived. He was likely, Ithought, to fall into error through the over-refinement of hislogic,--his preference for a subtle and bizarre explanation when aplainer and more commonplace one lay ready to his hand. Yet, on theother hand, I had myself seen the evidence, and I had heard thereasons for his deductions. When I looked back on the long chain ofcurious circumstances, many of them trivial in themselves, but alltending in the same direction, I could not disguise from myself thateven if Holmes's explanation were incorrect the true theory must beequally outré and startling.At three o'clock in the afternoon there was a loud peal at the bell,an authoritative voice in the hall, and, to my surprise, no less aperson than Mr. Athelney Jones was shown up to me. Very different washe, however, from the brusque and masterful professor of common sensewho had taken over the case so confidently at Upper Norwood. Hisexpression was downcast, and his bearing meek and even apologetic."Good-day, sir; good-day," said he. "Mr. Sherlock Holmes is out, Iunderstand.""Yes, and I cannot be sure when he will be back. But perhaps youwould care to wait. Take that chair and try one of these cigars.""Thank you; I don't mind if I do," said he, mopping his face with ared bandanna handkerchief."And a whiskey-and-soda?""Well, half a glass. It is very hot for the time of year; and I havehad a good deal to worry and try me. You know my theory about thisNorwood case?""I remember that you expressed one.""Well, I have been obliged to reconsider it. I had my net drawntightly round Mr. Sholto, sir, when pop he went through a hole in themiddle of it. He was able to prove an alibi which could not beshaken. From the time that he left his brother's room he was neverout of sight of some one or other. So it could not be he who climbedover roofs and through trap-doors. It's a very dark case, and myprofessional credit is at stake. I should be very glad of a littleassistance.""We all need help sometimes," said I."Your friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes is a wonderful man, sir," said he,in a husky and confidential voice. "He's a man who is not to be beat.I have known that young man go into a good many cases, but I neversaw the case yet that he could not throw a light upon. He isirregular in his methods, and a little quick perhaps in jumping attheories, but, on the whole, I think he would have made a mostpromising officer, and I don't care who knows it. I have had a wirefrom him this morning, by which I understand that he has got someclue to this Sholto business. Here is the message."He took the telegram out of his pocket, and handed it to me. It wasdated from Poplar at twelve o'clock. "Go to Baker Street at once," itsaid. "If I have not returned, wait for me. I am close on the trackof the Sholto gang. You can come with us to-night if you want to bein at the finish.""This sounds well. He has evidently picked up the scent again," saidI."Ah, then he has been at fault too," exclaimed Jones, with evidentsatisfaction. "Even the best of us are thrown off sometimes. Ofcourse this may prove to be a false alarm; but it is my duty as anofficer of the law to allow no chance to slip. But there is some oneat the door. Perhaps this is he."A heavy step was heard ascending the stair, with a great wheezing andrattling as from a man who was sorely put to it for breath. Once ortwice he stopped, as though the climb were too much for him, but atlast he made his way to our door and entered. His appearancecorresponded to the sounds which we had heard. He was an aged man,clad in seafaring garb, with an old pea-jacket buttoned up to histhroat. His back was bowed, his knees were shaky, and his breathingwas painfully asthmatic. As he leaned upon a thick oaken cudgel hisshoulders heaved in the effort to draw the air into his lungs. He hada colored scarf round his chin, and I could see little of his facesave a pair of keen dark eyes, overhung by bushy white brows, andlong gray side-whiskers. Altogether he gave me the impression of arespectable master mariner who had fallen into years and poverty."What is it, my man?" I asked.He looked about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age."Is Mr. Sherlock Holmes here?" said he."No; but I am acting for him. You can tell me any message you havefor him.""It was to him himself I was to tell it," said he."But I tell you that I am acting for him. Was it about MordecaiSmith's boat?""Yes. I knows well where it is. An' I knows where the men he is afterare. An' I knows where the treasure is. I knows all about it.""Then tell me, and I shall let him know.""It was to him I was to tell it," he repeated, with the petulantobstinacy of a very old man."Well, you must wait for him.""No, no; I ain't goin' to lose a whole day to please no one. If Mr.Holmes ain't here, then Mr. Holmes must find it all out for himself.I don't care about the look of either of you, and I won't tell aword."He shuffled towards the door, but Athelney Jones got in front of him."Wait a bit, my friend," said he. "You have important information,and you must not walk off. We shall keep you, whether you like ornot, until our friend returns."The old man made a little run towards the door, but, as AthelneyJones put his broad back up against it, he recognized the uselessnessof resistance."Pretty sort o' treatment this!" he cried, stamping his stick. "Icome here to see a gentleman, and you two, who I never saw in mylife, seize me and treat me in this fashion!""You will be none the worse," I said. "We shall recompense you forthe loss of your time. Sit over here on the sofa, and you will nothave long to wait."He came across sullenly enough, and seated himself with his faceresting on his hands. Jones and I resumed our cigars and our talk.Suddenly, however, Holmes's voice broke in upon us."I think that you might offer me a cigar too," he said.We both started in our chairs. There was Holmes sitting close to uswith an air of quiet amusement."Holmes!" I exclaimed. "You here! But where is the old man?""Here is the old man," said he, holding out a heap of white hair."Here he is,--wig, whiskers, eyebrows, and all. I thought my disguisewas pretty good, but I hardly expected that it would stand thattest.""Ah, you rogue!" cried Jones, highly delighted. "You would have madean actor, and a rare one. You had the proper workhouse cough, andthose weak legs of yours are worth ten pound a week. I thought I knewthe glint of your eye, though. You didn't get away from us so easily,you see.""I have been working in that get-up all day," said he, lighting hiscigar. "You see, a good many of the criminal classes begin to knowme,--especially since our friend here took to publishing some of mycases: so I can only go on the war-path under some simple disguiselike this. You got my wire?""Yes; that was what brought me here.""How has your case prospered?""It has all come to nothing. I have had to release two of myprisoners, and there is no evidence against the other two.""Never mind. We shall give you two others in the place of them. Butyou must put yourself under my orders. You are welcome to all theofficial credit, but you must act on the line that I point out. Isthat agreed?""Entirely, if you will help me to the men.""Well, then, in the first place I shall want a fast police-boat--asteam launch--to be at the Westminster Stairs at seven o'clock.""That is easily managed. There is always one about there; but I canstep across the road and telephone to make sure.""Then I shall want two stanch men, in case of resistance.""There will be two or three in the boat. What else?""When we secure the men we shall get the treasure. I think that itwould be a pleasure to my friend here to take the box round to theyoung lady to whom half of it rightfully belongs. Let her be thefirst to open it.--Eh, Watson?""It would be a great pleasure to me.""Rather an irregular proceeding," said Jones, shaking his head."However, the whole thing is irregular, and I suppose we must wink atit. The treasure must afterwards be handed over to the authoritiesuntil after the official investigation.""Certainly. That is easily managed. One other point. I should muchlike to have a few details about this matter from the lips ofJonathan Small himself. You know I like to work the detail of mycases out. There is no objection to my having an unofficial interviewwith him, either here in my rooms or elsewhere, as long as he isefficiently guarded?""Well, you are master of the situation. I have had no proof yet ofthe existence of this Jonathan Small. However, if you can catch him Idon't see how I can refuse you an interview with him.""That is understood, then?""Perfectly. Is there anything else?""Only that I insist upon your dining with us. It will be ready inhalf an hour. I have oysters and a brace of grouse, with something alittle choice in white wines.--Watson, you have never yet recognizedmy merits as a housekeeper." CHAPTER X The End of the IslanderOur meal was a merry one. Holmes coud talk exceedingly well when hechose, and that night he did choose. He appeared to be in a state ofnervous exaltation. I have never known him so brilliant. He spoke ona quick succession of subjects,--on miracle-plays, on medievalpottery, on Stradivarius violins, on the Buddhism of Ceylon, and onthe war-ships of the future,--handling each as though he had made aspecial study of it. His bright humor marked the reaction from hisblack depression of the preceding days. Athelney Jones proved to be asociable soul in his hours of relaxation, and face his dinner withthe air of a bon vivant. For myself, I felt elated at the thoughtthat we were nearing the end of our task, and I caught something ofHolmes's gaiety. None of us alluded during dinner to the cause whichhad brought us together.When the cloth was cleared, Holmes glanced at this watch, and filledup three glasses with port. "One bumper," said he, "to the success ofour little expedition. And now it is high time we were off. Have youa pistol, Watson?""I have my old service-revolver in my desk.""You had best take it, then. It is well to be prepared. I see thatthe cab is at the door. I ordered it for half-past six."It was a little past seven before we reached the Westminster wharf,and found our launch awaiting us. Holmes eyed it critically."Is there anything to mark it as a police-boat?""Yes,--that green lamp at the side.""Then take it off."The small change was made, we stepped on board, and the ropes werecast off. Jones, Holmes, and I sat in the stern. There was one man atthe rudder, one to tend the engines, and two burly police-inspectorsforward."Where to?" asked Jones."To the Tower. Tell them to stop opposite Jacobson's Yard."Our craft was evidently a very fast one. We shot past the long linesof loaded barges as though they were stationary. Holmes smiled withsatisfaction as we overhauled a river steamer and left her behind us."We ought to be able to catch anything on the river," he said."Well, hardly that. But there are not many launches to beat us.""We shall have to catch the Aurora, and she has a name for being aclipper. I will tell you how the land lies, Watson. You recollect howannoyed I was at being balked by so small a thing?""Yes.""Well, I gave my mind a thorough rest by plunging into a chemicalanalysis. One of our greatest statesmen has said that a change ofwork is the best rest. So it is. When I had succeeded in dissolvingthe hydrocarbon which I was at work at, I came back to our problem ofthe Sholtos, and thought the whole matter out again. My boys had beenup the river and down the river without result. The launch was not atany landing-stage or wharf, nor had it returned. Yet it could hardlyhave been scuttled to hide their traces,--though that always remainedas a possible hypothesis if all else failed. I knew this man Smallhad a certain degree of low cunning, but I did not think him capableof anything in the nature of delicate finesse. That is usually aproduct of higher education. I then reflected that since he hadcertainly been in London some time--as we had evidence that hemaintained a continual watch over Pondicherry Lodge--he could hardlyleave at a moment's notice, but would need some little time, if itwere only a day, to arrange his affairs. That was the balance ofprobability, at any rate.""It seems to me to be a little weak," said I. "It is more probablethat he had arranged his affairs before ever he set out upon hisexpedition.""No, I hardly think so. This lair of his would be too valuable aretreat in case of need for him to give it up until he was sure thathe could do without it. But a second consideration struck me.Jonathan Small must have felt that the peculiar appearance of hiscompanion, however much he may have top-coated him, would give riseto gossip, and possibly be associated with this Norwood tragedy. Hewas quite sharp enough to see that. They had started from theirhead-quarters under cover of darkness, and he would wish to get backbefore it was broad light. Now, it was past three o'clock, accordingto Mrs. Smith, when they got the boat. It would be quite bright, andpeople would be about in an hour or so. Therefore, I argued, they didnot go very far. They paid Smith well to hold his tongue, reservedhis launch for the final escape, and hurried to their lodgings withthe treasure-box. In a couple of nights, when they had time to seewhat view the papers took, and whether there was any suspicion, theywould make their way under cover of darkness to some ship atGravesend or in the Downs, where no doubt they had already arrangedfor passages to America or the Colonies.""But the launch? They could not have taken that to their lodgings.""Quite so. I argued that the launch must be no great way off, inspite of its invisibility. I then put myself in the place of Small,and looked at it as a man of his capacity would. He would probablyconsider that to send back the launch or to keep it at a wharf wouldmake pursuit easy if the police did happen to get on his track. How,then, could he conceal the launch and yet have her at hand whenwanted? I wondered what I should do myself if I were in his shoes. Icould only think of one way of doing it. I might land the launch overto some boat-builder or repairer, with directions to make a triflingchange in her. She would then be removed to his shed or hard, and sobe effectually concealed, while at the same time I could have her ata few hours' notice.""That seems simple enough.""It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to beoverlooked. However, I determined to act on the idea. I started atonce in this harmless seaman's rig and inquired at all the yards downthe river. I drew blank at fifteen, but at thesixteenth--Jacobson's--I learned that the Aurora had been handed overto them two days ago by a wooden-legged man, with some trivialdirections as to her rudder. 'There ain't naught amiss with herrudder,' said the foreman. 'There she lies, with the red streaks.' Atthat moment who should come down but Mordecai Smith, the missingowner? He was rather the worse for liquor. I should not, of course,have known him, but he bellowed out his name and the name of hislaunch. 'I want her to-night at eight o'clock,' said he,--'eighto'clock sharp, mind, for I have two gentlemen who won't be keptwaiting.' They had evidently paid him well, for he was very flush ofmoney, chucking shillings about to the men. I followed him somedistance, but he subsided into an ale-house: so I went back to theyard, and, happening to pick up one of my boys on the way, Istationed him as a sentry over the launch. He is to stand at water'sedge and wave his handkerchief to us when they start. We shall belying off in the stream, and it will be a strange thing if we do nottake men, treasure, and all.""You have planned it all very neatly, whether they are the right menor not," said Jones; "but if the affair were in my hands I shouldhave had a body of police in Jacobson's Yard, and arrested them whenthey came down.""Which would have been never. This man Small is a pretty shrewdfellow. He would send a scout on ahead, and if anything made himsuspicious lie snug for another week.""But you might have stuck to Mordecai Smith, and so been led to theirhiding-place," said I."In that case I should have wasted my day. I think that it is ahundred to one against Smith knowing where they live. As long as hehas liquor and good pay, why should he ask questions? They send himmessages what to do. No, I thought over every possible course, andthis is the best."While this conversation had been proceeding, we had been shooting thelong series of bridges which span the Thames. As we passed the Citythe last rays of the sun were gilding the cross upon the summit ofSt. Paul's. It was twilight before we reached the Tower."That is Jacobson's Yard," said Holmes, pointing to a bristle ofmasts and rigging on the Surrey side. "Cruise gently up and down hereunder cover of this string of lighters." He took a pair ofnight-glasses from his pocket and gazed some time at the shore. "Isee my sentry at his post," he remarked, "but no sign of ahandkerchief.""Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them,"said Jones, eagerly. We were all eager by this time, even thepolicemen and stokers, who had a very vague idea of what was goingforward."We have no right to take anything for granted," Holmes answered. "Itis certainly ten to one that they go down-stream, but we cannot becertain. From this point we can see the entrance of the yard, andthey can hardly see us. It will be a clear night and plenty of light.We must stay where we are. See how the folk swarm over yonder in thegaslight.""They are coming from work in the yard.""Dirty-looking rascals, but I suppose every one has some littleimmortal spark concealed about him. You would not think it, to lookat them. There is no a priori probability about it. A strange enigmais man!""Some one calls him a soul concealed in an animal," I suggested."Winwood Reade is good upon the subject," said Holmes. "He remarksthat, while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in theaggregate he becomes a mathematical certainty. You can, for example,never foretell what any one man will do, but you can say withprecision what an average number will be up to. Individuals vary, butpercentages remain constant. So says the statistician. But do I see ahandkerchief? Surely there is a white flutter over yonder.""Yes, it is your boy," I cried. "I can see him plainly.""And there is the Aurora," exclaimed Holmes, "and going like thedevil! Full speed ahead, engineer. Make after that launch with theyellow light. By heaven, I shall never forgive myself if she provesto have the heels of us!"She had slipped unseen through the yard-entrance and passed behindtwo or three small craft, so that she had fairly got her speed upbefore we saw her. Now she was flying down the stream, near in to theshore, going at a tremendous rate. Jones looked gravely at her andshook his head."She is very fast," he said. "I doubt if we shall catch her.""We must catch her!" cried Holmes, between his teeth. "Heap it on,stokers! Make her do all she can! If we burn the boat we must havethem!"We were fairly after her now. The furnaces roared, and the powerfulengines whizzed and clanked, like a great metallic heart. Her sharp,steep prow cut through the river-water and sent two rolling waves toright and to left of us. With every throb of the engines we sprangand quivered like a living thing. One great yellow lantern in ourbows threw a long, flickering funnel of light in front of us. Rightahead a dark blur upon the water showed where the Aurora lay, and theswirl of white foam behind her spoke of the pace at which she wasgoing. We flashed past barges, steamers, merchant-vessels, in andout, behind this one and round the other. Voices hailed us out of thedarkness, but still the Aurora thundered on, and still we followedclose upon her track."Pile it on, men, pile it on!" cried Holmes, looking down into theengine-room, while the fierce glow from below beat upon his eager,aquiline face. "Get every pound of steam you can.""I think we gain a little," said Jones, with his eyes on the Aurora."I am sure of it," said I. "We shall be up with her in a very fewminutes."At that moment, however, as our evil fate would have it, a tug withthree barges in tow blundered in between us. It was only by puttingour helm hard down that we avoided a collision, and before we couldround them and recover our way the Aurora had gained a good twohundred yards. She was still, however, well in view, and the murkyuncertain twilight was setting into a clear starlit night. Ourboilers were strained to their utmost, and the frail shell vibratedand creaked with the fierce energy which was driving us along. We hadshot through the Pool, past the West India Docks, down the longDeptford Reach, and up again after rounding the Isle of Dogs. Thedull blur in front of us resolved itself now clearly enough into thedainty Aurora. Jones turned our search-light upon her, so that wecould plainly see the figures upon her deck. One man sat by thestern, with something black between his knees over which he stooped.Beside him lay a dark mass which looked like a Newfoundland dog. Theboy held the tiller, while against the red glare of the furnace Icould see old Smith, stripped to the waist, and shovelling coals fordear life. They may have had some doubt at first as to whether wewere really pursuing them, but now as we followed every winding andturning which they took there could no longer be any question aboutit. At Greenwich we were about three hundred paces behind them. AtBlackwall we could not have been more than two hundred and fifty. Ihave coursed many creatures in many countries during my checkeredcareer, but never did sport give me such a wild thrill as this mad,flying man-hunt down the Thames. Steadily we drew in upon them, yardby yard. In the silence of the night we could hear the panting andclanking of their machinery. The man in the stern still crouched uponthe deck, and his arms were moving as though he were busy, whileevery now and then he would look up and measure with a glance thedistance which still separated us. Nearer we came and nearer. Jonesyelled to them to stop. We were not more than four boat's lengthsbehind them, both boats flying at a tremendous pace. It was a clearreach of the river, with Barking Level upon one side and themelancholy Plumstead Marshes upon the other. At our hail the man inthe stern sprang up from the deck and shook his two clinched fists atus, cursing the while in a high, cracked voice. He was a good-sized,powerful man, and as he stood poising himself with legs astride Icould see that from the thigh downwards there was but a wooden stumpupon the right side. At the sound of his strident, angry cries therewas movement in the huddled bundle upon the deck. It straighteneditself into a little black man--the smallest I have ever seen--with agreat, misshapen head and a shock of tangled, dishevelled hair.Holmes had already drawn his revolver, and I whipped out mine at thesight of this savage, distorted creature. He was wrapped in some sortof dark ulster or blanket, which left only his face exposed; but thatface was enough to give a man a sleepless night. Never have I seenfeatures so deeply marked with all bestiality and cruelty. His smalleyes glowed and burned with a sombre light, and his thick lips werewrithed back from his teeth, which grinned and chattered at us with ahalf animal fury."Fire if he raises his hand," said Holmes, quietly. We were within aboat's-length by this time, and almost within touch of our quarry. Ican see the two of them now as they stood, the white man with hislegs far apart, shrieking out curses, and the unhallowed dwarf withhis hideous face, and his strong yellow teeth gnashing at us in thelight of our lantern.It was well that we had so clear a view of him. Even as we looked heplucked out from under his covering a short, round piece of wood,like a school-ruler, and clapped it to his lips. Our pistols rang outtogether. He whirled round, threw up his arms, and with a kind ofchoking cough fell sideways into the stream. I caught one glimpse ofhis venomous, menacing eyes amid the white swirl of the waters. Atthe same moment the wooden-legged man threw himself upon the rudderand put it hard down, so that his boat made straight in for thesouthern bank, while we shot past her stern, only clearing her by afew feet. We were round after her in an instant, but she was alreadynearly at the bank. It was a wild and desolate place, where the moonglimmered upon a wide expanse of marsh-land, with pools of stagnantwater and beds of decaying vegetation. The launch with a dull thudran up upon the mud-bank, with her bow in the air and her stern flushwith the water. The fugitive sprang out, but his stump instantly sankits whole length into the sodden soil. In vain he struggled andwrithed. Not one step could he possibly take either forwards orbackwards. He yelled in impotent rage, and kicked frantically intothe mud with his other foot, but his struggles only bored his woodenpin the deeper into the sticky bank. When we brought our launchalongside he was so firmly anchored that it was only by throwing theend of a rope over his shoulders that we were able to haul him out,and to drag him, like some evil fish, over our side. The two Smiths,father and son, sat sullenly in their launch, but came aboard meeklyenough when commanded. The Aurora herself we hauled off and made fastto our stern. A solid iron chest of Indian workmanship stood upon thedeck. This, there could be no question, was the same that hadcontained the ill-omened treasure of the Sholtos. There was no key,but it was of considerable weight, so we transferred it carefully toour own little cabin. As we steamed slowly up-stream again, weflashed our search-light in every direction, but there was no sign ofthe Islander. Somewhere in the dark ooze at the bottom of the Thameslie the bones of that strange visitor to our shores."See here," said Holmes, pointing to the wooden hatchway. "We werehardly quick enough with our pistols." There, sure enough, justbehind where we had been standing, stuck one of those murderous dartswhich we knew so well. It must have whizzed between us at the instantthat we fired. Holmes smiled at it and shrugged his shoulders in hiseasy fashion, but I confess that it turned me sick to think of thehorrible death which had passed so close to us that night. CHAPTER XI The Great Agra TreasureOur captive sat in the cabin opposite to the iron box which he haddone so much and waited so long to gain. He was a sunburned,reckless-eyed fellow, with a net-work of lines and wrinkles all overhis mahogany features, which told of a hard, open-air life. There wasa singular prominence about his bearded chin which marked a man whowas not to be easily turned from his purpose. His age may have beenfifty or thereabouts, for his black, curly hair was thickly shot withgray. His face in repose was not an unpleasing one, though his heavybrows and aggressive chin gave him, as I had lately seen, a terribleexpression when moved to anger. He sat now with his handcuffed handsupon his lap, and his head sunk upon his breast, while he looked withhis keen, twinkling eyes at the box which had been the cause of hisill-doings. It seemed to me that there was more sorrow than anger inhis rigid and contained countenance. Once he looked up at me with agleam of something like humour in his eyes."Well, Jonathan Small," said Holmes, lighting a cigar, "I am sorrythat it has come to this.""And so am I, sir," he answered, frankly. "I don't believe that I canswing over the job. I give you my word on the book that I neverraised hand against Mr. Sholto. It was that little hell-hound Tongawho shot one of his cursed darts into him. I had no part in it, sir.I was as grieved as if it had been my blood-relation. I welted thelittle devil with the slack end of the rope for it, but it was done,and I could not undo it again.""Have a cigar," said Holmes; "and you had best take a pull out of myflask, for you are very wet. How could you expect so small and weak aman as this black fellow to overpower Mr. Sholto and hold him whileyou were climbing the rope?""You seem to know as much about it as if you were there, sir. Thetruth is that I hoped to find the room clear. I knew the habits ofthe house pretty well, and it was the time when Mr. Sholto usuallywent down to his supper. I shall make no secret of the business. Thebest defence that I can make is just the simple truth. Now, if it hadbeen the old major I would have swung for him with a light heart. Iwould have thought no more of knifing him than of smoking this cigar.But it's cursed hard that I should be lagged over this young Sholto,with whom I had no quarrel whatever.""You are under the charge of Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard. Heis going to bring you up to my rooms, and I shall ask you for a trueaccount of the matter. You must make a clean breast of it, for if youdo I hope that I may be of use to you.I think I can prove that thepoison acts so quickly that the man was dead before ever you reachedthe room.""That he was, sir. I never got such a turn in my life as when I sawhim grinning at me with his head on his shoulder as I climbed throughthe window. It fairly shook me, sir. I'd have half killed Tonga forit if he had not scrambled off. That was how he came to leave hisclub, and some of his darts too, as he tells me, which I dare sayhelped to put you on our track; though how you kept on it is morethan I can tell. I don't feel no malice against you for it. But itdoes seem a queer thing," he added, with a bitter smile, "that I whohave a fair claim to nigh upon half a million of money should spendthe first half of my life building a breakwater in the Andamans, andam like to spend the other half digging drains at Dartmoor. It was anevil day for me when first I clapped eyes upon the merchant Achmetand had to do with the Agra treasure, which never brought anythingbut a curse yet upon the man who owned it. To him it brought murder,to Major Sholto it brought fear and guilt, to me it has meant slaveryfor life."At this moment Athelney Jones thrust his broad face and heavyshoulders into the tiny cabin. "Quite a family party," he remarked."I think I shall have a pull at that flask, Holmes.Well, I think wemay all congratulate each other. Pity we didn't take the other alive;but there was no choice. I say, Holmes, you must confess that you cutit rather fine. It was all we could do to overhaul her.""All is well that ends well," said Holmes. "But I certainly did notknow that the Aurora was such a clipper.""Smith says she is one of the fastest launches on the river, and thatif he had had another man to help him with the engines we shouldnever have caught her. He swears he knew nothing of this Norwoodbusiness.""Neither he did," cried our prisoner,--"not a word. I chose hislaunch because I heard that she was a flier. We told him nothing, butwe paid him well, and he was to get something handsome if we reachedour vessel, the Esmeralda, at Gravesend, outward bound for theBrazils.""Well, if he has done no wrong we shall see that no wrong comes tohim. If we are pretty quick in catching our men, we are not so quickin condemning them." It was amusing to notice how the consequentialJones was already beginning to give himself airs on the strength ofthe capture. From the slight smile which played over SherlockHolmes's face, I could see that the speech had not been lost uponhim."We will be at Vauxhall Bridge presently," said Jones, "and shallland you, Dr. Watson, with the treasure-box. I need hardly tell youthat I am taking a very grave responsibility upon myself in doingthis. It is most irregular; but of course an agreement is anagreement. I must, however, as a matter of duty, send an inspectorwith you, since you have so valuable a charge. You will drive, nodoubt?""Yes, I shall drive.""It is a pity there is no key, that we may make an inventory first.You will have to break it open. Where is the key, my man?""At the bottom of the river," said Small, shortly."Hum! There was no use your giving this unnecessary trouble. We havehad work enough already through you. However, doctor, I need not warnyou to be careful. Bring the box back with you to the Baker Streetrooms. You will find us there, on our way to the station."They landed me at Vauxhall, with my heavy iron box, and with a bluff,genial inspector as my companion. A quarter of an hour's drivebrought us to Mrs. Cecil Forrester's. The servant seemed surprised atso late a visitor. Mrs. Cecil Forrester was out for the evening, sheexplained, and likely to be very late. Miss Morstan, however, was inthe drawing-room: so to the drawing-room I went, box in hand, leavingthe obliging inspector in the cab.She was seated by the open window, dressed in some sort of whitediaphanous material, with a little touch of scarlet at the neck andwaist. The soft light of a shaded lamp fell upon her as she leanedback in the basket chair, playing over her sweet, grave face, andtinting with a dull, metallic sparkle the rich coils of her luxurianthair. One white arm and hand drooped over the side of the chair, andher whole pose and figure spoke of an absorbing melancholy. At thesound of my foot-fall she sprang to her feet, however, and a brightflush of surprise and of pleasure colored her pale cheeks."I heard a cab drive up," she said. "I thought that Mrs. Forresterhad come back very early, but I never dreamed that it might be you.What news have you brought me?""I have brought something better than news," said I, putting down thebox upon the table and speaking jovially and boisterously, though myheart was heavy within me. "I have brought you something which isworth all the news in the world. I have brought you a fortune."She glanced at iron box. "Is that the treasure, then?" she asked,coolly enough."Yes, this is the great Agra treasure. Half of it is yours and halfis Thaddeus Sholto's. You will have a couple of hundred thousandeach. Think of that! An annuity of ten thousand pounds. There will befew richer young ladies in England. Is it not glorious?"I think that I must have been rather overacting my delight, and thatshe detected a hollow ring in my congratulations, for I saw hereyebrows rise a little, and she glanced at me curiously."If I have it," said she, "I owe it to you.""No, no," I answered, "not to me, but to my friend Sherlock Holmes.With all the will in the world, I could never have followed up a cluewhich has taxed even his analytical genius.As it was, we verynearly lost it at the last moment.""Pray sit down and tell me all about it, Dr. Watson," said she.I narrated briefly what had occurred since I had seen herlast,--Holmes's new method of search, the discovery of the Aurora,the appearance of Athelney Jones, our expedition in the evening, andthe wild chase down the Thames. She listened with parted lips andshining eyes to my recital of our adventures. When I spoke of thedart which had so narrowly missed us, she turned so white that Ifeared that she was about to faint."It is nothing," she said, as I hastened to pour her out some water."I am all right again. It was a shock to me to hear that I had placedmy friends in such horrible peril.""That is all over," I answered. "It was nothing. I will tell you nomore gloomy details. Let us turn to something brighter. There is thetreasure. What could be brighter than that? I got leave to bring itwith me, thinking that it would interest you to be the first to seeit.""It would be of the greatest interest to me," she said. There was noeagerness in her voice, however. It had struck her, doubtless, thatit might seem ungracious upon her part to be indifferent to a prizewhich had cost so much to win."What a pretty box!" she said, stooping over it. "This is Indianwork, I suppose?""Yes; it is Benares metal-work.""And so heavy!" she exclaimed, trying to raise it. "The box alonemust be of some value. Where is the key?""Small threw it into the Thames," I answered. "I must borrow Mrs.Forrester's poker." There was in the front a thick and broad hasp,wrought in the image of a sitting Buddha. Under this I thrust the endof the poker and twisted it outward as a lever. The hasp sprang openwith a loud snap. With trembling fingers I flung back the lid. Weboth stood gazing in astonishment. The box was empty!No wonder that it was heavy. The iron-work was two-thirds of an inchthick all round. It was massive, well made, and solid, like a chestconstructed to carry things of great price, but not one shred orcrumb of metal or jewelry lay within it. It was absolutely andcompletely empty."The treasure is lost," said Miss Morstan, calmly.As I listened to the words and realized what they meant, a greatshadow seemed to pass from my soul. I did not know how this Agratreasure had weighed me down, until now that it was finally removed.It was selfish, no doubt, disloyal, wrong, but I could realizenothing save that the golden barrier was gone from between us. "ThankGod!" I ejaculated from my very heart.She looked at me with a quick, questioning smile. "Why do you saythat?" she asked."Because you are within my reach again," I said, taking her hand. Shedid not withdraw it. "Because I love you, Mary, as truly as ever aman loved a woman. Because this treasure, these riches, sealed mylips. Now that they are gone I can tell you how I love you. That iswhy I said, 'Thank God.'""Then I say, 'Thank God,' too," she whispered, as I drew her to myside. Whoever had lost a treasure, I knew that night that I hadgained one. CHAPTER XII The Strange Story of Jonathan SmallA very patient man was that inspector in the cab, for it was a wearytime before I rejoined him. His face clouded over when I showed himthe empty box."There goes the reward!" said he, gloomily. "Where there is no moneythere is no pay. This night's work would have been worth a tennereach to Sam Brown and me if the treasure had been there.""Mr. Thaddeus Sholto is a rich man," I said. "He will see that youare rewarded, treasure or no."The inspector shook his head despondently, however. "It's a bad job,"he repeated; "and so Mr. Athelney Jones will think."His forecast proved to be correct, for the detective looked blankenough when I got to Baker Street and showed him the empty box. Theyhad only just arrived, Holmes, the prisoner, and he, for they hadchanged their plans so far as to report themselves at a station uponthe way. My companion lounged in his arm-chair with his usuallistless expression, while Small sat stolidly opposite to him withhis wooden leg cocked over his sound one. As I exhibited the emptybox he leaned back in his chair and laughed aloud."This is your doing, Small," said Athelney Jones, angrily."Yes, I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it," hecried, exultantly. "It is my treasure; and if I can't have the lootI'll take darned good care that no one else does. I tell you that noliving man has any right to it, unless it is three men who are in theAndaman convict-barracks and myself. I know now that I cannot havethe use of it, and I know that they cannot. I have acted all throughfor them as much as for myself. It's been the sign of four with usalways. Well I know that they would have had me do just what I havedone, and throw the treasure into the Thames rather than let it go tokith or kin of Sholto or of Morstan. It was not to make them richthat we did for Achmet. You'll find the treasure where the key is,and where little Tonga is. When I saw that your launch must catch us,I put the loot away in a safe place. There are no rupees for you thisjourney.""You are deceiving us, Small," said Athelney Jones, sternly. "If youhad wished to throw the treasure into the Thames it would have beeneasier for you to have thrown box and all.""Easier for me to throw, and easier for you to recover," he answered,with a shrewd, sidelong look. "The man that was clever enough to huntme down is clever enough to pick an iron box from the bottom of ariver. Now that they are scattered over five miles or so, it may be aharder job. It went to my heart to do it, though. I was half mad whenyou came up with us. However, there's no good grieving over it. I'vehad ups in my life, and I've had downs, but I've learned not to cryover spilled milk.""This is a very serious matter, Small," said the detective. "If youhad helped justice, instead of thwarting it in this way, you wouldhave had a better chance at your trial.""Justice!" snarled the ex-convict. "A pretty justice! Whose loot isthis, if it is not ours? Where is the justice that I should give itup to those who have never earned it? Look how I have earned it!Twenty long years in that fever-ridden swamp, all day at work underthe mangrove-tree, all night chained up in the filthy convict-huts,bitten by mosquitoes, racked with ague, bullied by every cursedblack-faced policeman who loved to take it out of a white man. Thatwas how I earned the Agra treasure; and you talk to me of justicebecause I cannot bear to feel that I have paid this price only thatanother may enjoy it! I would rather swing a score of times, or haveone of Tonga's darts in my hide, than live in a convict's cell andfeel that another man is at his ease in a palace with the money thatshould be mine." Small had dropped his mask of stoicism, and all thiscame out in a wild whirl of words, while his eyes blazed, and thehandcuffs clanked together with the impassioned movement of hishands. I could understand, as I saw the fury and the passion of theman, that it was no groundless or unnatural terror which hadpossessed Major Sholto when he first learned that the injured convictwas upon his track."You forget that we know nothing of all this," said Holmes quietly."We have not heard your story, and we cannot tell how far justice mayoriginally have been on your side.""Well, sir, you have been very fair-spoken to me, though I can seethat I have you to thank that I have these bracelets upon my wrists.Still, I bear no grudge for that. It is all fair and above-board. Ifyou want to hear my story I have no wish to hold it back. What I sayto you is God's truth, every word of it. Thank you; you can put theglass beside me here, and I'll put my lips to it if I am dry."I am a Worcestershire man myself,--born near Pershore. I dare sayyou would find a heap of Smalls living there now if you were to look.I have often thought of taking a look round there, but the truth isthat I was never much of a credit to the family, and I doubt if theywould be so very glad to see me. They were all steady, chapel-goingfolk, small farmers, well known and respected over the country-side,while I was always a bit of a rover. At last, however, when I wasabout eighteen, I gave them no more trouble, for I got into a messover a girl, and could only get out of it again by taking the queen'sshilling and joining the 3d Buffs, which was just starting for India."I wasn't destined to do much soldiering, however. I had just gotpast the goose-step, and learned to handle my musket, when I was foolenough to go swimming in the Ganges. Luckily for me, my companysergeant, John Holder, was in the water at the same time, and he wasone of the finest swimmers in the service. A crocodile took me, justas I was half-way across, and nipped off my right leg as clean as asurgeon could have done it, just above the knee. What with the shockand the loss of blood, I fainted, and should have drowned if Holderhad not caught hold of me and paddled for the bank. I was five monthsin hospital over it, and when at last I was able to limp out of itwith this timber toe strapped to my stump I found myself invalidedout of the army and unfitted for any active occupation."I was, as you can imagine, pretty down on my luck at this time, forI was a useless cripple though not yet in my twentieth year. However,my misfortune soon proved to be a blessing in disguise. A man namedAbelwhite, who had come out there as an indigo-planter, wanted anoverseer to look after his coolies and keep them up to their work. Hehappened to be a friend of our colonel's, who had taken an interestin me since the accident. To make a long story short, the colonelrecommended me strongly for the post and, as the work was mostly tobe done on horseback, my leg was no great obstacle, for I had enoughknee left to keep good grip on the saddle. What I had to do was toride over the plantation, to keep an eye on the men as they worked,and to report the idlers. The pay was fair, I had comfortablequarters, and altogether I was content to spend the remainder of mylife in indigo-planting. Mr. Abelwhite was a kind man, and he wouldoften drop into my little shanty and smoke a pipe with me, for whitefolk out there feel their hearts warm to each other as they never dohere at home."Well, I was never in luck's way long. Suddenly, without a note ofwarning, the great mutiny broke upon us. One month India lay as stilland peaceful, to all appearance, as Surrey or Kent; the next therewere two hundred thousand black devils let loose, and the country wasa perfect hell. Of course you know all about it, gentlemen,--a dealmore than I do, very like, since reading is not in my line. I onlyknow what I saw with my own eyes. Our plantation was at a placecalled Muttra, near the border of the Northwest Provinces. Nightafter night the whole sky was alight with the burning bungalows, andday after day we had small companies of Europeans passing through ourestate with their wives and children, on their way to Agra, wherewere the nearest troops. Mr. Abelwhite was an obstinate man. He hadit in his head that the affair had been exaggerated, and that itwould blow over as suddenly as it had sprung up. There he sat on hisveranda, drinking whiskey-pegs and smoking cheroots, while thecountry was in a blaze about him. Of course we stuck by him, I andDawson, who, with his wife, used to do the book-work and themanaging. Well, one fine day the crash came. I had been away on adistant plantation, and was riding slowly home in the evening, whenmy eye fell upon something all huddled together at the bottom of asteep nullah. I rode down to see what it was, and the cold struckthrough my heart when I found it was Dawson's wife, all cut intoribbons, and half eaten by jackals and native dogs. A little furtherup the road Dawson himself was lying on his face, quite dead, with anempty revolver in his hand and four Sepoys lying across each other infront of him. I reined up my horse, wondering which way I shouldturn, but at that moment I saw thick smoke curling up fromAbelwhite's bungalow and the flames beginning to burst through theroof. I knew then that I could do my employer no good, but would onlythrow my own life away if I meddled in the matter. From where I stoodI could see hundreds of the black fiends, with their red coats stillon their backs, dancing and howling round the burning house. Some ofthem pointed at me, and a couple of bullets sang past my head; so Ibroke away across the paddy-fields, and found myself late at nightsafe within the walls at Agra."As it proved, however, there was no great safety there, either. Thewhole country was up like a swarm of bees. Wherever the English couldcollect in little bands they held just the ground that their gunscommanded. Everywhere else they were helpless fugitives. It was afight of the millions against the hundreds; and the cruellest part ofit was that these men that we fought against, foot, horse, andgunners, were our own picked troops, whom we had taught and trained,handling our own weapons, and blowing our own bugle-calls. At Agrathere were the 3d Bengal Fusiliers, some Sikhs, two troops of horse,and a battery of artillery. A volunteer corps of clerks and merchantshad been formed, and this I joined, wooden leg and all. We went outto meet the rebels at Shahgunge early in July, and we beat them backfor a time, but our powder gave out, and we had to fall back upon thecity. Nothing but the worst news came to us from every side,--whichis not to be wondered at, for if you look at the map you will seethat we were right in the heart of it. Lucknow is rather better thana hundred miles to the east, and Cawnpore about as far to the south.From every point on the compass there was nothing but torture andmurder and outrage."The city of Agra is a great place, swarming with fanatics and fiercedevil-worshippers of all sorts. Our handful of men were lost amongthe narrow, winding streets. Our leader moved across the river,therefore, and took up his position in the old fort at Agra. I don'tknow if any of you gentlemen have ever read or heard anything of thatold fort. It is a very queer place,--the queerest that ever I was in,and I have been in some rum corners, too. First of all, it isenormous in size. I should think that the enclosure must be acres andacres. There is a modern part, which took all our garrison, women,children, stores, and everything else, with plenty of room over. Butthe modern part is nothing like the size of the old quarter, wherenobody goes, and which is given over to the scorpions and thecentipedes. It is all full of great deserted halls, and windingpassages, and long corridors twisting in and out, so that it is easyenough for folk to get lost in it. For this reason it was seldom thatany one went into it, though now and again a party with torches mightgo exploring."The river washes along the front of the old fort, and so protectsit, but on the sides and behind there are many doors, and these hadto be guarded, of course, in the old quarter as well as in that whichwas actually held by our troops. We were short-handed, with hardlymen enough to man the angles of the building and to serve the guns.It was impossible for us, therefore, to station a strong guard atevery one of the innumerable gates. What we did was to organize acentral guard-house in the middle of the fort, and to leave each gateunder the charge of one white man and two or three natives. I wasselected to take charge during certain hours of the night of a smallisolated door upon the southwest side of the building. Two Sikhtroopers were placed under my command, and I was instructed ifanything went wrong to fire my musket, when I might rely upon helpcoming at once from the central guard. As the guard was a good twohundred paces away, however, and as the space between was cut up intoa labyrinth of passages and corridors, I had great doubts as towhether they could arrive in time to be of any use in case of anactual attack."Well, I was pretty proud at having this small command given me,since I was a raw recruit, and a game-legged one at that. For twonights I kept the watch with my Punjaubees. They were tall,fierce-looking chaps, Mahomet Singh and Abdullah Khan by name, bothold fighting-men who had borne arms against us at Chilian-wallah.They could talk English pretty well, but I could get little out ofthem. They preferred to stand together and jabber all night in theirqueer Sikh lingo. For myself, I used to stand outside the gate-way,looking down on the broad, winding river and on the twinkling lightsof the great city. The beating of drums, the rattle of tomtoms, andthe yells and howls of the rebels, drunk with opium and with bang,were enough to remind us all night of our dangerous neighbors acrossthe stream. Every two hours the officer of the night used to comeround to all the posts, to make sure that all was well."The third night of my watch was dark and dirty, with a small,driving rain. It was dreary work standing in the gate-way hour afterhour in such weather. I tried again and again to make my Sikhs talk,but without much success. At two in the morning the rounds passed,and broke for a moment the weariness of the night. Finding that mycompanions would not be led into conversation, I took out my pipe,and laid down my musket to strike the match. In an instant the twoSikhs were upon me. One of them snatched my firelock up and levelledit at my head, while the other held a great knife to my throat andswore between his teeth that he would plunge it into me if I moved astep."My first thought was that these fellows were in league with therebels, and that this was the beginning of an assault. If our doorwere in the hands of the Sepoys the place must fall, and the womenand children be treated as they were in Cawnpore. Maybe you gentlementhink that I am just making out a case for myself, but I give you myword that when I thought of that, though I felt the point of theknife at my throat, I opened my mouth with the intention of giving ascream, if it was my last one, which might alarm the main guard. Theman who held me seemed to know my thoughts; for, even as I bracedmyself to it, he whispered, 'Don't make a noise. The fort is safeenough. There are no rebel dogs on this side of the river.' There wasthe ring of truth in what he said, and I knew that if I raised myvoice I was a dead man. I could read it in the fellow's brown eyes. Iwaited, therefore, in silence, to see what it was that they wantedfrom me."'Listen to me, Sahib,' said the taller and fiercer of the pair, theone whom they called Abdullah Khan. 'You must either be with us nowor you must be silenced forever. The thing is too great a one for usto hesitate. Either you are heart and soul with us on your oath onthe cross of the Christians, or your body this night shall be throwninto the ditch and we shall pass over to our brothers in the rebelarmy. There is no middle way. Which is it to be, death or life? Wecan only give you three minutes to decide, for the time is passing,and all must be done before the rounds come again.'"'How can I decide?' said I. 'You have not told me what you want ofme. But I tell you now that if it is anything against the safety ofthe fort I will have no truck with it, so you can drive home yourknife and welcome.'"'It is nothing against the fort,' said he. 'We only ask you to dothat which your countrymen come to this land for. We ask you to berich. If you will be one of us this night, we will swear to you uponthe naked knife, and by the threefold oath which no Sikh was everknown to break, that you shall have your fair share of the loot. Aquarter of the treasure shall be yours. We can say no fairer.'"'But what is the treasure, then?' I asked. 'I am as ready to be richas you can be, if you will but show me how it can be done.'"'You will swear, then,' said he, 'by the bones of your father, bythe honor of your mother, by the cross of your faith, to raise nohand and speak no word against us, either now or afterwards?'"'I will swear it,' I answered, 'provided that the fort is notendangered.'"'Then my comrade and I will swear that you shall have a quarter ofthe treasure which shall be equally divided among the four of us.'"'There are but three,' said I."'No; Dost Akbar must have his share. We can tell the tale to youwhile we await them. Do you stand at the gate, Mahomet Singh, andgive notice of their coming. The thing stands thus, Sahib, and I tellit to you because I know that an oath is binding upon a Feringhee,and that we may trust you. Had you been a lying Hindoo, though youhad sworn by all the gods in their false temples, your blood wouldhave been upon the knife, and your body in the water. But the Sikhknows the Englishman, and the Englishman knows the Sikh. Hearken,then, to what I have to say."'There is a rajah in the northern provinces who has much wealth,though his lands are small. Much has come to him from his father, andmore still he has set by himself, for he is of a low nature andhoards his gold rather than spend it. When the troubles broke out hewould be friends both with the lion and the tiger,--with the Sepoyand with the Company's raj. Soon, however, it seemed to him that thewhite men's day was come, for through all the land he could hear ofnothing but of their death and their overthrow. Yet, being a carefulman, he made such plans that, come what might, half at least of histreasure should be left to him. That which was in gold and silver hekept by him in the vaults of his palace, but the most precious stonesand the choicest pearls that he had he put in an iron box, and sentit by a trusty servant who, under the guise of a merchant, shouldtake it to the fort at Agra, there to lie until the land is at peace.Thus, if the rebels won he would have his money, but if the Companyconquered his jewels would be saved to him. Having thus divided hishoard, he threw himself into the cause of the Sepoys, since they werestrong upon his borders. By doing this, mark you, Sahib, his propertybecomes the due of those who have been true to their salt."'This pretended merchant, who travels under the name of Achmet, isnow in the city of Agra, and desires to gain his way into the fort.He has with him as travelling-companion my foster-brother Dost Akbar,who knows his secret. Dost Akbar has promised this night to lead himto a side-postern of the fort, and has chosen this one for hispurpose. Here he will come presently, and here he will find MahometSingh and myself awaiting him. The place is lonely, and none shallknow of his coming. The world shall know of the merchant Achmet nomore, but the great treasure of the rajah shall be divided among us.What say you to it, Sahib?'"In Worcestershire the life of a man seems a great and a sacredthing; but it is very different when there is fire and blood allround you and you have been used to meeting death at every turn.Whether Achmet the merchant lived or died was a thing as light as airto me, but at the talk about the treasure my heart turned to it, andI thought of what I might do in the old country with it, and how myfolk would stare when they saw their ne'er-do-well coming back withhis pockets full of gold moidores. I had, therefore, already made upmy mind. Abdullah Khan, however, thinking that I hesitated, pressedthe matter more closely."'Consider, Sahib,' said he, 'that if this man is taken by thecommandant he will be hung or shot, and his jewels taken by thegovernment, so that no man will be a rupee the better for them. Now,since we do the taking of him, why should we not do the rest as well?The jewels will be as well with us as in the Company's coffers. Therewill be enough to make every one of us rich men and great chiefs. Noone can know about the matter, for here we are cut off from all men.What could be better for the purpose?Say again, then, Sahib,whether you are with us, or if we must look upon you as an enemy.'"'I am with you heart and soul,' said I."'It is well,' he answered, handing me back my firelock. 'You seethat we trust you, for your word, like ours, is not to be broken. Wehave now only to wait for my brother and the merchant.'"'Does your brother know, then, of what you will do?' I asked."'The plan is his. He has devised it. We will go to the gate andshare the watch with Mahomet Singh.'"The rain was still falling steadily, for it was just the beginningof the wet season. Brown, heavy clouds were drifting across the sky,and it was hard to see more than a stone-cast. A deep moat lay infront of our door, but the water was in places nearly dried up, andit could easily be crossed. It was strange to me to be standing therewith those two wild Punjaubees waiting for the man who was coming tohis death."Suddenly my eye caught the glint of a shaded lantern at the otherside of the moat. It vanished among the mound-heaps, and thenappeared again coming slowly in our direction."'Here they are!' I exclaimed."'You will challenge him, Sahib, as usual,' whispered Abdullah. 'Givehim no cause for fear. Send us in with him, and we shall do the restwhile you stay here on guard. Have the lantern ready to uncover, thatwe may be sure that it is indeed the man.'"The light had flickered onwards, now stopping and now advancing,until I could see two dark figures upon the other side of the moat. Ilet them scramble down the sloping bank, splash through the mire, andclimb half-way up to the gate, before I challenged them."'Who goes there?' said I, in a subdued voice."'Friends,' came the answer. I uncovered my lantern and threw a floodof light upon them. The first was an enormous Sikh, with a blackbeard which swept nearly down to his cummerbund. Outside of a show Ihave never seen so tall a man. The other was a little, fat, roundfellow, with a great yellow turban, and a bundle in his hand, done upin a shawl. He seemed to be all in a quiver with fear, for his handstwitched as if he had the ague, and his head kept turning to left andright with two bright little twinkling eyes, like a mouse when heventures out from his hole. It gave me the chills to think of killinghim, but I thought of the treasure, and my heart set as hard as aflint within me. When he saw my white face he gave a little chirrupof joy and came running up towards me."'Your protection, Sahib,' he panted,--'your protection for theunhappy merchant Achmet. I have travelled across Rajpootana that Imight seek the shelter of the fort at Agra. I have been robbed andbeaten and abused because I have been the friend of the Company. Itis a blessed night this when I am once more in safety,--I and my poorpossessions.'"'What have you in the bundle?' I asked."'An iron box,' he answered, 'which contains one or two little familymatters which are of no value to others, but which I should be sorryto lose. Yet I am not a beggar; and I shall reward you, young Sahib,and your governor also, if he will give me the shelter I ask.'"I could not trust myself to speak longer with the man. The more Ilooked at his fat, frightened face, the harder did it seem that weshould slay him in cold blood. It was best to get it over."'Take him to the main guard,' said I. The two Sikhs closed in uponhim on each side, and the giant walked behind, while they marched inthrough the dark gate-way. Never was a man so compassed round withdeath. I remained at the gate-way with the lantern."I could hear the measured tramp of their footsteps sounding throughthe lonely corridors. Suddenly it ceased, and I heard voices, and ascuffle, with the sound of blows. A moment later there came, to myhorror, a rush of footsteps coming in my direction, with the loudbreathing of a running man. I turned my lantern down the long,straight passage, and there was the fat man, running like the wind,with a smear of blood across his face, and close at his heels,bounding like a tiger, the great black-bearded Sikh, with a knifeflashing in his hand. I have never seen a man run so fast as thatlittle merchant. He was gaining on the Sikh, and I could see that ifhe once passed me and got to the open air he would save himself yet.My heart softened to him, but again the thought of his treasureturned me hard and bitter. I cast my firelock between his legs as heraced past, and he rolled twice over like a shot rabbit. Ere he couldstagger to his feet the Sikh was upon him, and buried his knife twicein his side. The man never uttered moan nor moved muscle, but laywere he had fallen. I think myself that he may have broken his neckwith the fall. You see, gentlemen, that I am keeping my promise. I amtelling you every work of the business just exactly as it happened,whether it is in my favor or not."He stopped, and held out his manacled hands for the whiskey-and-waterwhich Holmes had brewed for him. For myself, I confess that I had nowconceived the utmost horror of the man, not only for thiscold-blooded business in which he had been concerned, but even morefor the somewhat flippant and careless way in which he narrated it.Whatever punishment was in store for him, I felt that he might expectno sympathy from me. Sherlock Holmes and Jones sat with their handsupon their knees, deeply interested in the story, but with the samedisgust written upon their faces.He may have observed it, for therewas a touch of defiance in his voice and manner as he proceeded."It was all very bad, no doubt," said he. "I should like to know howmany fellows in my shoes would have refused a share of this loot whenthey knew that they would have their throats cut for their pains.Besides, it was my life or his when once he was in the fort. If hehad got out, the whole business would come to light, and I shouldhave been court-martialled and shot as likely as not; for people werenot very lenient at a time like that.""Go on with your story," said Holmes, shortly."Well, we carried him in, Abdullah, Akbar, and I. A fine weight hewas, too, for all that he was so short. Mahomet Singh was left toguard the door. We took him to a place which the Sikhs had alreadyprepared. It was some distance off, where a winding passage leads toa great empty hall, the brick walls of which were all crumbling topieces. The earth floor had sunk in at one place, making a naturalgrave, so we left Achmet the merchant there, having first covered himover with loose bricks. This done, we all went back to the treasure."It lay where he had dropped it when he was first attacked. The boxwas the same which now lies open upon your table. A key was hung by asilken cord to that carved handle upon the top. We opened it, and thelight of the lantern gleamed upon a collection of gems such as I haveread of and thought about when I was a little lad at Pershore. It wasblinding to look upon them. When we had feasted our eyes we took themall out and made a list of them. There were one hundred andforty-three diamonds of the first water, including one which has beencalled, I believe, 'the Great Mogul' and is said to be the secondlargest stone in existence. Then there were ninety-seven very fineemeralds, and one hundred and seventy rubies, some of which, however,were small. There were forty carbuncles, two hundred and tensapphires, sixty-one agates, and a great quantity of beryls, onyxes,cats'-eyes, turquoises, and other stones, the very names of which Idid not know at the time, though I have become more familiar withthem since. Besides this, there were nearly three hundred very finepearls, twelve of which were set in a gold coronet. By the way, theselast had been taken out of the chest and were not there when Irecovered it."After we had counted our treasures we put them back into the chestand carried them to the gate-way to show them to Mahomet Singh. Thenwe solemnly renewed our oath to stand by each other and be true toour secret. We agreed to conceal our loot in a safe place until thecountry should be at peace again, and then to divide it equally amongourselves. There was no use dividing it at present, for if gems ofsuch value were found upon us it would cause suspicion, and there wasno privacy in the fort nor any place where we could keep them. Wecarried the box, therefore, into the same hall where we had buriedthe body, and there, under certain bricks in the best-preserved wall,we made a hollow and put our treasure. We made careful note of theplace, and next day I drew four plans, one for each of us, and putthe sign of the four of us at the bottom, for we had sworn that weshould each always act for all, so that none might take advantage.That is an oath that I can put my hand to my heart and swear that Ihave never broken."Well, there's no use my telling you gentlemen what came of theIndian mutiny. After Wilson took Delhi and Sir Colin relieved Lucknowthe back of the business was broken. Fresh troops came pouring in,and Nana Sahib made himself scarce over the frontier. A flying columnunder Colonel Greathed came round to Agra and cleared the Pandiesaway from it. Peace seemed to be settling upon the country, and wefour were beginning to hope that the time was at hand when we mightsafely go off with our shares of the plunder. In a moment, however,our hopes were shattered by our being arrested as the murderers ofAchmet."It came about in this way. When the rajah put his jewels into thehands of Achmet he did it because he knew that he was a trusty man.They are suspicious folk in the East, however: so what does thisrajah do but take a second even more trusty servant and set him toplay the spy upon the first? This second man was ordered never to letAchmet out of his sight, and he followed him like his shadow. He wentafter him that night and saw him pass through the doorway. Of coursehe thought he had taken refuge in the fort, and applied for admissionthere himself next day, but could find no trace of Achmet. Thisseemed to him so strange that he spoke about it to a sergeant ofguides, who brought it to the ears of the commandant. A thoroughsearch was quickly made, and the body was discovered. Thus at thevery moment that we thought that all was safe we were all four seizedand brought to trial on a charge of murder,--three of us because wehad held the gate that night, and the fourth because he was known tohave been in the company of the murdered man. Not a word about thejewels came out at the trial, for the rajah had been deposed anddriven out of India: so no one had any particular interest in them.The murder, however, was clearly made out, and it was certain that wemust all have been concerned in it. The three Sikhs got penalservitude for life, and I was condemned to death, though my sentencewas afterwards commuted into the same as the others."It was rather a queer position that we found ourselves in then.There we were all four tied by the leg and with precious littlechance of ever getting out again, while we each held a secret whichmight have put each of us in a palace if we could only have made useof it. It was enough to make a man eat his heart out to have to standthe kick and the cuff of every petty jack-in-office, to have rice toeat and water to drink, when that gorgeous fortune was ready for himoutside, just waiting to be picked up. It might have driven me mad;but I was always a pretty stubborn one, so I just held on and bidedmy time."At last it seemed to me to have come. I was changed from Agra toMadras, and from there to Blair Island in the Andamans. There arevery few white convicts at this settlement, and, as I had behavedwell from the first, I soon found myself a sort of privileged person.I was given a hut in Hope Town, which is a small place on the slopesof Mount Harriet, and I was left pretty much to myself. It is adreary, fever-stricken place, and all beyond our little clearings wasinfested with wild cannibal natives, who were ready enough to blow apoisoned dart at us if they saw a chance. There was digging, andditching, and yam-planting, and a dozen other things to be done, sowe were busy enough all day; though in the evening we had a littletime to ourselves. Among other things, I learned to dispense drugsfor the surgeon, and picked up a smattering of his knowledge. All thetime I was on the lookout for a chance of escape; but it is hundredsof miles from any other land, and there is little or no wind in thoseseas: so it was a terribly difficult job to get away."The surgeon, Dr. Somerton, was a fast, sporting young chap, and theother young officers would meet in his rooms of an evening and playcards. The surgery, where I used to make up my drugs, was next to hissitting-room, with a small window between us. Often, if I feltlonesome, I used to turn out the lamp in the surgery, and then,standing there, I could hear their talk and watch their play. I amfond of a hand at cards myself, and it was almost as good as havingone to watch the others. There was Major Sholto, Captain Morstan, andLieutenant Bromley Brown, who were in command of the native troops,and there was the surgeon himself, and two or three prison-officials,crafty old hands who played a nice sly safe game. A very snug littleparty they used to make."Well, there was one thing which very soon struck me, and that wasthat the soldiers used always to lose and the civilians to win. Mind,I don't say that there was anything unfair, but so it was. Theseprison-chaps had done little else than play cards ever since they hadbeen at the Andamans, and they knew each other's game to a point,while the others just played to pass the time and threw their cardsdown anyhow. Night after night the soldiers got up poorer men, andthe poorer they got the more keen they were to play. Major Sholto wasthe hardest hit. He used to pay in notes and gold at first, but soonit came to notes of hand and for big sums. He sometimes would win fora few deals, just to give him heart, and then the luck would set inagainst him worse than ever. All day he would wander about as blackas thunder, and he took to drinking a deal more than was good forhim."One night he lost even more heavily than usual. I was sitting in myhut when he and Captain Morstan came stumbling along on the way totheir quarters. They were bosom friends, those two, and never farapart. The major was raving about his losses."'It's all up, Morstan,' he was saying, as they passed my hut. 'Ishall have to send in my papers. I am a ruined man.'"'Nonsense, old chap!' said the other, slapping him upon theshoulder. 'I've had a nasty facer myself, but--' That was all I couldhear, but it was enough to set me thinking.A couple of days later Major Sholto was strolling on the beach: so Itook the chance of speaking to him."'I wish to have your advice, major,' said I."'Well, Small, what is it?' he asked, taking his cheroot from hislips."'I wanted to ask you, sir,' said I, 'who is the proper person towhom hidden treasure should be handed over. I know where half amillion worth lies, and, as I cannot use it myself, I thought perhapsthe best thing that I could do would be to hand it over to the properauthorities, and then perhaps they would get my sentence shortenedfor me.'"'Half a million, Small?' he gasped, looking hard at me to see if Iwas in earnest."'Quite that, sir,--in jewels and pearls. It lies there ready foranyone. And the queer thing about it is that the real owner isoutlawed and cannot hold property, so that it belongs to the firstcomer.'"'To government, Small,' he stammered,--'to government.' But he saidit in a halting fashion, and I knew in my heart that I had got him."'You think, then, sir, that I should give the information to theGovernor-General?' said I, quietly."'Well, well, you must not do anything rash, or that you mightrepent. Let me hear all about it, Small. Give me the facts.'"I told him the whole story, with small changes so that he could notidentify the places. When I had finished he stood stock still andfull of thought. I could see by the twitch of his lip that there wasa struggle going on within him."'This is a very important matter, Small,' he said, at last. 'Youmust not say a word to any one about it, and I shall see you againsoon.'"Two nights later he and his friend Captain Morstan came to my hut inthe dead of the night with a lantern."'I want you just to let Captain Morstan hear that story from yourown lips, Small,' said he."I repeated it as I had told it before."'It rings true, eh?' said he. 'It's good enough to act upon?'"Captain Morstan nodded."'Look here, Small,' said the major. 'We have been talking it over,my friend here and I, and we have come to the conclusion that thissecret of yours is hardly a government matter, after all, but is aprivate concern of your own, which of course you have the power ofdisposing of as you think best. Now, the question is, what pricewould you ask for it? We might be inclined to take it up, and atleast look into it, if we could agree as to terms.' He tried to speakin a cool, careless way, but his eyes were shining with excitementand greed."'Why, as to that, gentlemen,' I answered, trying also to be cool,but feeling as excited as he did, 'there is only one bargain which aman in my position can make. I shall want you to help me to myfreedom, and to help my three companions to theirs.We shall thentake yo into partnership, and give you a fifth share to dividebetween you.'"'Hum!' said he. 'A fifth share! That is not very tempting.'"'It would come to fifty thousand apiece,' said I."'But how can we gain your freedom? You know very well that you askan impossibility.'"'Nothing of the sort,' I answered. 'I have thought it all out to thelast detail. The only bar to our escape is that we can get no boatfit for the voyage, and no provisions to last us for so long a time.There are plenty of little yachts and yawls at Calcutta or Madraswhich would serve our turn well. Do you bring one over. We shallengage to get aboard her by night, and if you will drop us on anypart of the Indian coast you will have done your part of thebargain.'"'If there were only one,' he said."'None or all,' I answered. 'We have sworn it. The four of us mustalways act together.'"'You see, Morstan,' said he, 'Small is a man of his word. He doesnot flinch from his friend. I think we may very well trust him.'"'It's a dirty business,' the other answered. 'Yet, as you say, themoney would save our commissions handsomely.'"'Well, Small,' said the major, 'we must, I suppose, try and meetyou. We must first, of course, test the truth of your story. Tell mewhere the box is hid, and I shall get leave of absence and go back toIndia in the monthly relief-boat to inquire into the affair.'"'Not so fast,' said I, growing colder as he got hot. 'I must havethe consent of my three comrades. I tell you that it is four or nonewith us.'"'Nonsense!' he broke in. 'What have three black fellows to do withour agreement?'"'Black or blue,' said I, 'they are in with me, and we all gotogether.'"Well, the matter ended by a second meeting, at which Mahomet Singh,Abdullah Khan, and Dost Akbar were all present. We talked the matterover again, and at last we came to an arrangement. We were to provideboth the officers with charts of the part of the Agra fort and markthe place in the wall where the treasure was hid. Major Sholto was togo to India to test our story. If he found the box he was to leave itthere, to send out a small yacht provisioned for a voyage, which wasto lie off Rutland Island, and to which we were to make our way, andfinally to return to his duties. Captain Morstan was then to applyfor leave of absence, to meet us at Agra, and there we were to have afinal division of the treasure, he taking the major's share as wellas his own. All this we sealed by the most solemn oaths that the mindcould think or the lips utter. I sat up all night with paper and ink,and by the morning I had the two charts all ready, signed with thesign of four,--that is, of Abdullah, Akbar, Mahomet, and myself."Well, gentlemen, I weary you with my long story, and I know that myfriend Mr. Jones is impatient to get me safely stowed in chokey. I'llmake it as short as I can. The villain Sholto went off to India, buthe never came back again. Captain Morstan showed me his name among alist of passengers in one of the mail-boats very shortly afterwards.His uncle had died, leaving him a fortune, and he had left the army,yet he could stoop to treat five men as he had treated us. Morstanwent over to Agra shortly afterwards, and found, as we expected, thatthe treasure was indeed gone. The scoundrel had stolen it all,without carrying out one of the conditions on which we had sold himthe secret. From that day I lived only for vengeance. I thought of itby day and I nursed it by night. It became an overpowering, absorbingpassion with me. I cared nothing for the law,--nothing for thegallows. To escape, to track down Sholto, to have my hand upon histhroat,--that was my one thought. Even the Agra treasure had come tobe a smaller thing in my mind than the slaying of Sholto."Well, I have set my mind on many things in this life, and never onewhich I did not carry out. But it was weary years before my timecame. I have told you that I had picked up something of medicine. Oneday when Dr. Somerton was down with a fever a little Andaman Islanderwas picked up by a convict-gang in the woods. He was sick to death,and had gone to a lonely place to die. I took him in hand, though hewas as venomous as a young snake, and after a couple of months I gothim all right and able to walk. He took a kind of fancy to me then,and would hardly go back to his woods, but was always hanging aboutmy hut. I learned a little of his lingo from him, and this made himall the fonder of me."Tonga--for that was his name--was a fine boatman, and owned a big,roomy canoe of his own. When I found that he was devoted to me andwould do anything to serve me, I saw my chance of escape. I talked itover with him. He was to bring his boat round on a certain night toan old wharf which was never guarded, and there he was to pick me up.I gave him directions to have several gourds of water and a lot ofyams, cocoa-nuts, and sweet potatoes."He was stanch and true, was little Tonga. No man ever had a morefaithful mate. At the night named he had his boat at the wharf. As itchanced, however, there was one of the convict-guard down there,--avile Pathan who had never missed a chance of insulting and injuringme. I had always vowed vengeance, and now I had my chance. It was asif fate had placed him in my way that I might pay my debt before Ileft the island. He stood on the bank with his back to me, and hiscarbine on his shoulder. I looked about for a stone to beat out hisbrains with, but none could I see."Then a queer thought came into my head and showed me where I couldlay my hand on a weapon. I sat down in the darkness and unstrapped mywooden leg. With three long hops I was on him. He put his carbine tohis shoulder, but I struck him full, and knocked the whole front ofhis skull in. You can see the split in the wood now where I hit him.We both went down together, for I could not keep my balance, but whenI got up I found him still lying quiet enough. I made for the boat,and in an hour we were well out at sea. Tonga had brought all hisearthly possessions with him, his arms and his gods. Among otherthings, he had a long bamboo spear, and some Andaman cocoa-nutmatting, with which I made a sort of sail. For ten days we werebeating about, trusting to luck, and on the eleventh we were pickedup by a trader which was going from Singapore to Jiddah with a cargoof Malay pilgrims. They were a rum crowd, and Tonga and I soonmanaged to settle down among them. They had one very good quality:they let you alone and asked no questions."Well, if I were to tell you all the adventures that my little chumand I went through, you would not thank me, for I would have you hereuntil the sun was shining. Here and there we drifted about the world,something always turning up to keep us from London. All the time,however, I never lost sight of my purpose. I would dream of Sholto atnight. A hundred times I have killed him in my sleep. At last,however, some three or four years ago, we found ourselves in England.I had no great difficulty in finding where Sholto lived, and I set towork to discover whether he had realized the treasure, or if he stillhad it. I made friends with someone who could help me,--I name nonames, for I don't want to get any one else in a hole,--and I soonfound that he still had the jewels. Then I tried to get at him inmany ways; but he was pretty sly, and had always two prize-fighters,besides his sons and his khitmutgar, on guard over him."One day, however, I got word that he was dying. I hurried at once tothe garden, mad that he should slip out of my clutches like that,and, looking through the window, I saw him lying in his bed, with hissons on each side of him. I'd have come through and taken my chancewith the three of them, only even as I looked at him his jaw dropped,and I knew that he was gone. I got into his room that same night,though, and I searched his papers to see if there was any record ofwhere he had hidden our jewels. There was not a line, however: so Icame away, bitter and savage as a man could be. Before I left Ibethought me that if I ever met my Sikh friends again it would be asatisfaction to know that I had left some mark of our hatred: so Iscrawled down the sign of the four of us, as it had been on thechart, and I pinned it on his bosom. It was too much that he shouldbe taken to the grave without some token from the men whom he hadrobbed and befooled."We earned a living at this time by my exhibiting poor Tonga at fairsand other such places as the black cannibal. He would eat raw meatand dance his war-dance: so we always had a hatful of pennies after aday's work. I still heard all the news from Pondicherry Lodge, andfor some years there was no news to hear, except that they werehunting for the treasure. At last, however, came what we had waitedfor so long. The treasure had been found. It was up at the top of thehouse, in Mr. Bartholomew Sholto's chemical laboratory. I came atonce and had a look at the place, but I could not see how with mywooden leg I was to make my way up to it. I learned, however, about atrap-door in the roof, and also about Mr. Sholto's supper-hour. Itseemed to me that I could manage the thing easily through Tonga. Ibrought him out with me with a long rope wound round his waist. Hecould climb like a cat, and he soon made his way through the roof,but, as ill luck would have it, Bartholomew Sholto was still in theroom, to his cost. Tonga thought he had done something very clever inkilling him, for when I came up by the rope I found him struttingabout as proud as a peacock. Very much surprised was he when I madeat him with the rope's end and cursed him for a little blood-thirstyimp. I took the treasure-box and let it down, and then slid downmyself, having first left the sign of the four upon the table, toshow that the jewels had come back at last to those who had mostright to them. Tonga then pulled up the rope, closed the window, andmade off the way that he had come."I don't know that I have anything else to tell you. I had heard awaterman speak of the speed of Smith's launch, the Aurora, so Ithought she would be a handy craft for our escape. I engaged with oldSmith, and was to give him a big sum if he got us safe to our ship.He knew, no doubt, that there was some screw loose, but he was not inour secrets. All this is the truth, and if I tell it to you,gentlemen, it is not to amuse you,--for you have not done me a verygood turn,--but it is because I believe the best defence I can makeis just to hold back nothing, but let all the world know how badly Ihave myself been served by Major Sholto, and how innocent I am of thedeath of his son.""A very remarkable account," said Sherlock Holmes. "A fitting wind-upto an extremely interesting case. There is nothing at all new to mein the latter part of your narrative, except that you brought yourown rope. That I did not know. By the way, I had hoped that Tonga hadlost all his darts; yet he managed to shoot one at us in the boat.""He had lost them all, sir, except the one which was in his blow-pipeat the time.""Ah, of course," said Holmes. "I had not thought of that.""Is there any other point which you would like to ask about?" askedthe convict, affably."I think not, thank you," my companion answered."Well, Holmes," said Athelney Jones, "You are a man to be humored,and we all know that you are a connoisseur of crime, but duty isduty, and I have gone rather far in doing what you and your friendasked me. I shall feel more at ease when we have our story-tellerhere safe under lock and key. The cab still waits, and there are twoinspectors down-stairs. I am much obliged to you both for yourassistance. Of course you will be wanted at the trial. Good-night toyou.""Good-night, gentlemen both," said Jonathan Small."You first, Small," remarked the wary Jones as they left the room."I'll take particular care that you don't club me with your woodenleg, whatever you may have done to the gentleman at the AndamanIsles.""Well, and there is the end of our little drama," I remarked, afterwe had set some time smoking in silence. "I fear that it may be thelast investigation in which I shall have the chance of studying yourmethods. Miss Morstan has done me the honor to accept me as a husbandin prospective."He gave a most dismal groan. "I feared as much," said he. "I reallycannot congratulate you."I was a little hurt. "Have you any reason to be dissatisfied with mychoice?" I asked."Not at all. I think she is one of the most charming young ladies Iever met, and might have been most useful in such work as we havebeen doing. She had a decided genius that way: witness the way inwhich she preserved that Agra plan from all the other papers of herfather. But love is an emotional thing, and whatever is emotional isopposed to that true cold reason which I place above all things. Ishould never marry myself, lest I bias my judgment.""I trust," said I, laughing, "that my judgment may survive theordeal. But you look weary.""Yes, the reaction is already upon me. I shall be as limp as a ragfor a week.""Strange," said I, "how terms of what in another man I should calllaziness alternate with your fits of splendid energy and vigor.""Yes," he answered, "there are in me the makings of a very fineloafer and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow. I often think ofthose lines of old Goethe,-- Schade, daß die Natur nur einen Mensch aus Dir schuf,Denn zum würdigen Mann war und zum Schelmen der Stoff."By the way, a propos of this Norwood business, you see that theyhad, as I surmised, a confederate in the house, who could be noneother than Lal Rao, the butler: so Jones actually has the undividedhonor of having caught one fish in his great haul.""The division seems rather unfair," I remarked. "You have done allthe work in this business. I get a wife out of it, Jones gets thecredit, pray what remains for you?""For me," said Sherlock Holmes, "there still remains thecocaine-bottle." And he stretched his long white hand up for it.